<pre>
 Guinea
 
 THE CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF GUINEA'
 November 10, 1958
 PREAMBLE
 The people of Guinea by their overwhelming vote of September 28,1958,
 rejected domination and, in so doing, acquired their national independence
 and became a free and sovereign state.
 The State of Guinea adheres fully to the Charter of the United Nations
 and to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 It proclaims the equality and solidarity of all its citizens without dis-
 tinction as to race, sex or creed.
 It affirms its will to utilize every means possible to realize and consolidate
 unity within the independence of all Africa. To this end it will fight against
 all tendencies and manifestations of chauvinism which it considers as
 serious obstacles to the realization of this aim.
 It expresses its desire to form bonds of friendship with all peoples based
 on the principles of equality, reciprocal interest and mutual respect of
 national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
 It upholds unreservedly all policies tending towards the creation of a
 United States of Africa and the safeguarding and consolidation of world
 peace.
 The principle of the Republic of Guinea is: Government of the people,
 by the people and for the people.
 TITLE I
 ON NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. Guinea is a Republic based on the principles of democracy,
 freedom of religion and social justice.
 1 English translation of Journal Officiel No. 3 of November 12, 1958, taken from
 booklet "Giant Stride Forward", published and supplied by the Information Service of
 the Embassy of Guinea to the United States.
 
 232
 
 
 The national flag consists of red, yellow and green vertical stripes of
 equal dimensions.
 The national anthem is "Liberty.”
 The motto of the Republic is: Work, Justice, Solidarity.
 TITLE II
 ON NATIONAL COLLECTIVITIES
 Art. 2. The Republic of Guinea shall be composed of regional organi-
 zations which shall be townships and districts.
 Art. 3. National sovereignty shall belong to the people who shall exer-
 cise it in all matters through their deputies to the National Assembly,
 whose members are elected by equal universal suffrage, in direct and
 secret ballot, or by referendum.
 TITLE III
 ON PARLIAMENT
 Art. 4. Parliament shall consist of one National Assembly whose mem-
 bers, elected on a national list for five years, bear the title of deputies.
 Art. 5. The method of electing members of the National Assembly,
 the terms of eligibility and incompatibility, as well as the number of
 deputies, shall be ascertained by law.
 Art. 6. The National Assembly shall be the sole judge of the eligibility
 of its members and the regularity of their election. It may accept their
 resignation.
 Art. 7. The National Assembly shall meet, without need of sanction,
 in two regular annual sessions in March and October, whose length shall
 not exceed two months.
 The Assembly may hold extraordinary sessions if so called by its Presi-
 dent, upon the request of the Government or of two thirds of its members.
 Art. 8. The officers of the National Assembly shall be elected at the
 beginning of each legislative period. Elections shall take place each year
 at the beginning of the first session.
 TITLE IV
 ON RELATIONS BETWEEN PARLIAMENT
 AND GOVERNMENT
 Art. 9. The National Assembly alone shall pass laws. The domain of
 the law is unlimited.
 
 Guinea
 
 233
 
 
 Art. 10. No member of the National Assembly shall be subjected to
 pursuit, investigation, arrest, detention or trial because of his opinions
 or votes during the exercise of his functions.
 Art. 11. Unless apprehended in flagrante delicto no member of the
 National Assembly shall, during the length of his term, be pursued in
 criminal matters except with the authority of the Assembly. Detention
 or pursuit of a deputy is suspended if the National Assembly so decides.
 Art. 12. Members of the National Assembly shall receive compensation
 for their services as determined by law.
 Art. 13. The meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. The
 National Assembly can hold meetings in camera upon the request of the
 President of the Government or of more than half of the members.
 Art. 14. The President of the Republic and the deputies to the Assembly
 alone shall have the power to initiate and propose laws.
 Art. 15. The National Assembly shall study drafts and proposals of
 laws which originate in its various Committees whose members, compo-
 sition and functions shall be determined by the National Assembly.
 Drafts of law submitted by the Government and proposals accepted by it
 shall be studied with priority.
 Art. 16. The National Assembly shall examine the estimate of the
 national budget which when voted on by Parliament shall become law.
 The national budget shall be ratified at the latest on the 30th of November
 of the preceding year.
 Art. 17. The deputies to the National Assembly shall possess the power
 of initiative for expenditures. No proposals tending to increase expendi-
 tures shall be presented without an accompanying proposal providing
 corresponding receipts.
 Art. 18. The National Assembly shall regulate the accounts of the
 nation. A statement of expenditures shall be presented before it at the
 end of each semester for the preceding semester. The final accounts of
 the preceding year shall be examined during the October session and
 ratified by law.
 Art. 19. The National Assembly shall dispose of the following means of
 information concerning governmental action:
 - oral questioning
 - written questioning
 - interpellation
 - audition by committees
 - investigation committees
 The law shall establish the conditions and procedure according to which
 these means of information shall be executed. The law also shall fix the
 time limit for answers.
 
 Guinea
 
 234
 
 
 Guinea
 
 TITLE V
 ON THE HEAD OF STATE
 Art. 20. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State. He
 shall be head of the armed forces. Any citizen who is eligible and has
 reached the age of 35 years can be elected President of the Republic.
 TITLE VI
 ON THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 21. The powers of the Government of the Republic shall be
 exercised by the President of the Republic assisted by a Cabinet.
 Art. 22. The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term of
 seven years by universal suffrage with an absolute majority on the first
 ballot or a plurality on the second ballot. He may be re-elected for a
 second term.
 Art. 23. The President of the Republic shall appoint the ministers by
 decree. No member of the Government may be arrested or pursued without
 the previous consent of the President of the Republic.
 Art. 24. In the exercise of their duties, the ministers shall be responsible
 for their actions to the President of the Republic who is responsible for
 the general policies of his cabinet to the National Assembly.
 Art. 25. The President of the Republic shall ensure the execution of
 all laws. He shall make appointments to all posts in the public adminis-
 tration and to all offices and functions of a military nature.
 Art. 26. Government acts shall be signed by the President of the Re-
 public and countersigned by the ministers in charge of their execution.
 Art. 27. During his term of office no government member shall hold
 any other obligation, professional or private.
 Art. 28. In case of vacancy, the Cabinet shall remain in function to
 administer all current affairs until the election of a new Head of State.
 Art. 29. Ministers may attend meetings of the National Assembly
 and of its committees. They shall be heard upon their request.
 They may be assisted or represented in the discussions before the
 National Assembly or its Committees by civil servants assigned for
 this purpose.
 Art. 30. In emergency cases the President of the Republic may delegate
 his powers to a minister.
 
 235
 
 
 Guinea
 
 TITLE VII
 ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
 Art. 31. The Republic of Guinea shall conform with the rules of inter-
 national law.
 Art. 32. The President of the Republic shall negotiate treaties subject
 to the provisions of Article 33.
 Art. 33. Treaties concerning international organization, treaties of
 commerce, treaties of peace, treaties which engage the finances of the State,
 those which relate to individuals, those which modify provisions of a
 legislative nature as well as those which entail assignments, exchanges,
 adjunctions of territory, shall not be ratified except by law and shall
 take effect after ratification.
 TITLE VIII
 ON INTER-AFRICAN RELATIONS
 Art. 34. The Republic may conclude, with any African state, agree-
 ments of association or of community, comprising partial or complete
 surrender of sovereignty in view of achieving African unity.
 TITLE IX
 ON   JUDICIAL POWERS
 Art. 35. Justice shall be rendered in the name of the people of Guinea.
 The President of the Republic shall be the trustee of the independence
 of judicial authority.
 He shall hold the power of pardon.
 In the exercise of their judicial functions, the judges shall obey but the
 law.
 Art. 36. The Court shall hold its sessions in public except in particular
 cases as set by law.
 The accused shall be entitled to the right of defense.
 Art. 37. Judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure
 the respect of the rights of citizens under conditions stipulated by law.
 ..Art. 38. The judicial organization of the Republic shall be established
 by law.
 
 236
 
 
 Guinea
 
 TITLE X
 ON THE RIGHTS AND FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
 OF CITIZENS
 Art. 39. All citizens of the Republic of Guinea, without distinction as
 to race, sex or creed, shall have the right to elect and be elected under the
 conditions established by law.
 Art. 40. The citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall enjoy freedom of
 speech, of press, of assembly, of association, of procession and of public
 demonstrations under the conditions as set by law.
 Art. 41. Freedom of religion shall be assured to all citizens by the se-
 cularity of schools and state.
 Art. 42. No one shall be detained arbitrarily.
 Art. 43. The domicile.of citizens of the Republic of Guinea is inviolable.
 The privacy of a citizen's mail is guaranteed by law.
 Art. 44. The citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall enjoy same and
 equal right to work, rest, social assistance and education.
 The exercise of trade unionism and the right to strike are recognized for
 the workers.
 Art. 45. Any act of racial discrimination as well as all propaganda of a
 racial or regional character shall be punishable by law.
 Art. 46. The Republic of Guinea grants the right of sanctuary to foreign
 citizens pursued because of their struggle for the defense of a just cause
 or for their scientific or cultural activities.
 Art. 47. All citizens of the Republic of Guinea shall conform to the
 Constitution and other laws of the Republic, pay their taxes and fulfil
 in an honest manner their civic duties.
 Art. 48. The defense of the nation is the sacred duty of every citizen
 of the Republic of Guinea.
 TITLE XI
 ON CONSTITUTIONAL REVISIONS
 Art. 49. The initiative for revising the Constitution shall belong con-
 currently to the President of the Republic and to members of the National
 Assembly. The National Assembly by vote of a two-thirds majority of
 its members may adopt or submit to referendum the draft of a consti-
 tutional revision.
 Art. 50. The republican form of State shall not be put to any consti-
 tutional revision.
 
 237
 
 
 238                           Guinea
 TITLE XII
 ON TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
 Art. 51. The Government functioning at the date of the promulgation
 of the present Constitution shall remain in office until the election of the
 President of the Republic.
 Art. 52. The present Constitution shall be promulgated by the Head
 of State within 48 hours following its adoption by the National Assembly.
 .Art. 53. The first legislative session of the National Assembly of the
 Republic of Guinea shall begin from the date of promulgation of the
 present constitution.
 
 
</pre>
