<pre>
 Senegal
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL'
 March 3, 1963
 PREAMBLE
 The Senegalese people hereby solemnly proclaims its independence and
 its attachment to the fundamental rights as defined by the Declaration
 of the Rights of Man and the Citizen of 1789 and by the Universal Decla-
 ration of December 10, 1948.
 It proclaims unassailable respect and guarantees for:
 - Political liberties;
 - Trade union liberties;
 - The rights and liberties of the human person, the family, and of
 territorial units;
 - Philosophic and religious liberties;
 - The right to individual and collective property;
 - Economic and social rights.
 The Senegalese People:
 Desiring to prepare the way for the unity of the African states and to
 assure the expectations such unity entails;
 Conscious of the need for a political, cultural, economic and social
 unity, indispensable in the affirmation of the African personality;
 Conscious of the historic, moral and material imperatives that unite
 the states of West Africa,
 Decides
 - That the Republic of Senegal will spare no effort toward the reali-
 zation of African unity.
 1 Projet de Loi Constitutionelle, Imprimerie Nationale D.L. 746. Supplied by the
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs with Note that it was adopted by constitutional referendum
 on March 3, 1963. Translated by the Editor.
 
 697
 
 
 Senegal
 
 TITLE I
 THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. The Republic of Senegal is secular, democratic and social. It
 shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the law without distinction
 of origin, race, sex or religion. It shall respect all beliefs.
 The official language of the Republic of Senegal shall be French. Its
 motto is "One People, One Aim, One Faith."
 The flag of the Republic is composed of three equal vertical stripes,
 green, gold and red. In the center of the gold stripe there shall be a five
 pointed green star.
 A law shall determine the seal and national anthem of the Republic.
 The principle of the Republic is "Government of the people, by the
 people and for the people."
 Art. 2. National sovereignty belongs to the people, which shall exercise
 it through its representatives or by referendum.
 No section of the people, nor any individual, may usurp the exercise
 of this right.
 Suffrage may be direct or indirect. It shall always be universal, equal
 and secret.
 All Senegalese nationals of both sexes who have reached their majority
 and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the conditions
 to be determined by law.
 Art. 3. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the ex-
 pression of the suffrage. They shall be formed and shall carry on their
 activities freely under the conditions determined by law. They must
 respect the principles of national sovereignty and democracy.
 Art. 4. Any racial, ethnic or religious discrimination, as well as any
 regionalist propaganda which might threaten the internal security of the
 State or the integrity of the territory of the Republic shall be punished
 by law.
 Art. 5. The institutions of the Republic shall be:
 - The President of the Republic;
 - The National Assembly;
 - The Supreme Court and the courts and tribunals.
 The capital of the Republic of Senegal is Dakar.
 
 698
 
 
 Senegal
 
 TITLE II
 PUBLIC LIBERTIES AND LIBERTIES
 OF THE PERSON
 Art. 6. The human person shall be sacred. The State is obliged to
 respect and protect it.
 The Senegalese people recognize the existence of the inviolable and
 inalienable rights of man as the basis of all human community, of peace
 and of justice in the world.
 Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality,
 provided he does not violate the rights of others nor infringe the legal order.
 Everyone has the right to life and physical integrity within the conditions
 defined by law.
 The freedom of the human person is inviolable. Noone shall be held
 guilty of any act except by virtue of a law in effect at the time the act
 was committed. The right to defence is absolute in all situations and at
 all stages of the procedure.
 Art. 7. All people are equal before the law. Men and women are legally
 equal.
 In Senegal there shall be no cause nor privilege by reason of place of
 birth, person or family.
 Art. 8. Everyone has the right to express and diffuse freely his opinions
 by word, pen and image. Everyone has the right to inform himself without
 hindrance at the sources which are accessible to all. These rights shall be
 limited by the provisions of laws and regulations as well as by respect
 for the honor of others.
 Art. 9. All citizens have the right freely to form associations and soc-
 ieties, except that they must conform with the formalities stipulated
 by laws and regulations.
 Groups whose purpose or activity would be contrary to the criminal
 laws or directed against the public order are prohibited.
 Art. 10. Secrecy of correspondence, postal, telegraphic and telephonic
 communications is inviolable. No restriction to this inviolability may be
 ordered except in the execution of a law.
 Art. 11. All citizens of the Republic have the right to move and establish
 themselves freely over the whole of the Republic of Senegal. This right
 may be limited only by law. Noone may be submitted to security measures
 except in the cases provided by law.
 Art. 12. The right of property is guaranteed by this Constitution.
 There shall be no infringements of this right except in cases of legally
 attested public necessity and after just and prior compensation.
 Art. 13. The domicile is inviolable.
 
 699
 
 
 No search may be ordered except by a judge or by the other authorities
 appointed by law. Searches may not be carried out except in the form
 prescribed by law. Measures infringing or restricting the inviolability
 of the domicile may be taken only to meet collective dangers or to protect
 persons in danger of death.
 Such measures may also be taken, in furtherance of a law, to protect
 public order against imminent danger, in particular to combat the risk
 of an epidemic or to protect endangered youth.
 Marriage and the Family
 Art. 14. Marriage and the family form the natural and moral basis of
 the human community. They are placed under the protection of the State.
 The State and public bodies shall have the social duty to watch over the
 physical and moral health of the family.
 Art. 15. Parents have the natural right and duty to raise their children.
 They shall perform this task with the aid of the State and public bodies.
 Youth shall be protected by the State and public bodies against ex-
 ploitation or moral abandonment.
 Education
 Art. 16. The State and public bodies shall create the necessary condi-
 tions and public institutions to guarantee the education of children.
 Art. 17. Public schools shall dispense education for the young. Religious
 institutions and communities shall also be recognized as purveyors of
 education.
 Art. 18. Private schools may be opened with the authorization and
 under the control of the State.
 Religions and Religious Communities
 Art. 19. Freedom of conscience, the free profession and practise of
 religion, subject to the public order, is guaranteed to all.
 Religious institutions and communities shall have the right to develop
 without hindrance. They shall not be controlled by the state. They shall
 regulate and administer their affairs in an autonomous manner.
 Work
 * Art. 20. Everyone has the right to work and the right to apply for
 employment. Noone may be damaged in his work by reason of his origins,
 his opinions or his beliefs.
 The worker may belong to a union and defend his rights by union action.
 
 Senegal
 
 700
 
 
 The right to strike is recognized. It shall be exercised within the frame-
 work of the laws regulating it. It may in no case infringe on the liberty
 of work.
 All workers shall participate, through their delegates, in the deter-
 mination of working conditions.
 Special laws shall institute the conditions of assistance and protection
 which society shall grant to workers.
 TITLE III
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
 Art. 21. The President of the Republic shall be elected by universal
 direct suffrage and by majority vote in two rounds of balloting. He shall
 be eligible for reelection.
 Art. 22. The Presidential term of office shall be four years.
 In the event that the Presidency is vacated before the end of the term,
 the President's successor shall be elected only to fill out the term.
 Art. 23. All candidates for the Presidency of the Republic must be of
 Senegalese nationality, enjoy political and civil rights, and be at least
 35 years of age.
 Art. 24. Candidacies shall be deposited with the Registrar of the
 Supreme Court, at least thirty and at most sixty days before the first
 ballot. However, if a candidate should die, new candidacies may be
 deposited at any time until the eve of the next balloting.
 No candidacy shall be acceptable that is not accompanied by the
 signature of fifty voters of which at least ten shall be deputies.
 Art. 25. Twenty nine days before the first round of balloting, the
 Supreme Court shall draw up and publish the list of candidates.
 The voters shall be convened by decree.
 Art. 26. The first round of balloting for the election of the President
 of the Republic shall take place at most forty five days and at least thirty
 days before the expiration of the mandate of the incumbent President of
 the Republic or, if the Presidency is vacant as a result of decease, resig-
 nation or definitive impediment, within sixty days following such vacancy.
 However, if the vacancy occurs less than six months before the ex-
 piration of the term of office, the presidential election shall take place
 at the usual time of expiration.
 The electoral campaign shall open fifteen days and close one day before
 the first round of voting.
 The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of the electoral
 campaign and the equal use by candidates of the means of propaganda.
 Art. 28. Noone shall be elected on the first round of voting unless he has
 received an absolute majority of the votes which must represent at least
 
 Senegal
 
 701
 
 
 one third of the registered voters. If no candidate receives the required
 majority, a second round of voting shall take place within ten days
 following the first round; at the second round a relative majority shall be
 sufficient for election.
 Art. 29. The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of the elec-
 tions and shall centralize the results.
 The election of the President of the Republic shall be notified in a
 provisional proclamation.
 If no candidate contests the regularity of the electoral operations, by
 deposition with the Registrar of the Supreme Court within five days of the
 provisional proclamation, the Court shall declare the President of the
 Republic definitively elected.
 In case of contestation, the Court must rule within ten days of the
 provisional proclamation; its ruling shall include either the definitive
 proclamation or the annulment of the election.
 In case of annulment, a new round of voting shall take place within
 ten days.
 Art. 30. The elected president of the Republic. shall take office after
 the definitive proclamation of his election and the close of the term of
 his predecessor.
 The incumbent President of the Republic shall remain in office until
 the installation of his successor.
 Art. 31. The President of the Republic shall take office after having
 taken the oath before the Supreme Court.
 He shall solemnly swear to fulfil faithfully the duties of President of the
 Republic of Senegal and to dedicate his efforts to the defense of the
 Constitution.
 Art. 32. The office of President of the Republic shall be incompatible
 with the exercise of any other private or public office, whether or not
 elective.
 Art. 33. The President of the Republic shall appoint the person to
 replace him in case of temporary impediment.
 Failing such an appointment, the President of the National Assembly
 shall automatically substitute for the President of the Republic.
 Art. 34. In case of definitive impediment, the death or resignation of
 the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly
 shall exercise his powers until the new President of the Republic takes
 office.
 Art. 35. The Supreme Court shall officially attest impediments to the
 Presidency of the Republic, in the cases stipulated in Article 33, paragraph
 2, and Article 34. A vote by a majority of two thirds of the members of
 the National Assembly shall be necessary to set in motion the action
 prescribed to follow upon such attestation.
 Art. 36. The President of the Republic, guardian of the Constitution,
 
 702
 
 Senegal
 
 
 shall be the holder of the executive power. He shall determine and conduct
 the policy of the nation.
 Art. 37. The President of the Republic shall ensure the implementation
 of the laws. He shall hold the regulatory power .
 Art. 38. The President of the Republic shall be the head of the ad-
 ministration and of the armed forces. He shall make all civil and military
 appointments. He shall control the armed forces.
 Art. 39. The President of the Republic shall be responsible for
 national defense. He shall preside over the High Council of National
 Defense.
 Art. 40. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors and
 Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers. Ambassadors and Envoys
 Extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him. ,
 Art. 41. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.
 Art. 42. The President of the Republic may address messages to the
 nation.
 Art. 43. The President of the Republic shall be assisted by ministers
 and secretaries of state, chosen and appointed by him. He shall
 assign their powers and shall dismiss them. Ministers and secretaries of
 state shall be responsible to the President of the Republic.
 Art. 44. The President of the Republic may delegate certain powers
 to the ministers and secretaries of state.
 Art. 45. The office of Minister or secretary of state shall be incom-
 patible with parliamentary office and with any professional public or
 private activity. The form of application of this article shall be established
 by an organic law.
 Art. 46. The President of the Republic may after consulting the Presi-
 dent of the National Assembly and the Supreme Court, submit a bill to
 referendum.
 Art. 47. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of
 the nation, the integrity of its territory, or the carrying out of its inter-
 national undertakings are threatened by a clear and present danger, and
 when the regular functioning of the governmental authorities is inter-
 rupted, the President of the Republic may, after informing the nation
 by a message, take all measures directed to restoring the regular function-
 ing of the governmental authorities and to insuring the safety of the nation,
 with the exception of any change in the Constitution.
 The National Assembly shall meet automatically. It shall, within 15
 days of the presidential message, be informed of all measures of a legis-
 lative character put into force by the President.
 The procedure stipulated in Article 66, paragraphs 4 and 5 shall be
 applicable thereto.
 
 Senegal
 
 703
 
 
 Senegal
 
 TITLE IV
 THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Art. 48. The representative assembly of the Republic of Senegal shall
 bear the name of National Assembly. Its members shall bear the title of
 Deputy to the National Assembly.
 Art. 49. Deputies to the National Assembly shall be elected by universal
 direct suffrage, for four years, at the same time as the President of the
 Republic. An organic law shall stipulate the number of members of the
 Assembly, their emoluments, the conditions of eligibility, the system of
 ineligibility and incompatibilities.
 Art. 50. No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or
 tried as a result of opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of
 his functions. No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested
 for crimes or misdemeanors without the authorization of the National
 Assembly, except in flagrante delicto.
 No deputy may, when the Assembly is not in session, be arrested without
 the authorization of the secretariat of the National Assembly, except in
 flagrante delicto, in cases of authorized prosecution or of definitive con-
 viction.
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the As-
 sembly so requests.
 Art. 51. The rules of procedure of the National Assembly, shall provide
 for:
 (1) the composition, rules of functioning of the secretariat, and the
 powers and prerogatives of the President who shall be elected for the
 duration of the legislature;
 (2) the number, method of appointment, composition, role and powers
 of the permanent commissions, without prejudice to the right of the
 Assembly to create special temporary commissions;
 (3) the organization of the administrative services under the authority
 of the President of the Assembly assisted by an administrative
 secretary-general;
 (4) the disciplinary system for deputies;
 (5) the different methods of voting, other than those expressly provided
 by the Constitution;
 (6) and in a general manner all the rules for the operation of the
 National Assembly within the framework of its constitutional powers.
 Art. 52. The National Assembly shall determine the date of its opening
 and the duration of its ordinary sessions. The following rules shall,
 however, be applicable:
 - the National Assembly shall hold two ordinary sessions every year;
 
 704
 
 
 - the first session must open within the first two weeks of the mbnth
 of April;
 - the second session shall open within the last quarter of the year;
 - the finance law of the year shall be examined during the first ordinary
 session.
 If an ordinary or extraordinary session closes without the Assembly's
 setting the date of opening of its next ordinary session, the secretariat
 of the Assembly shall fix this date in good time.
 The duration of each ordinary session may not exceed two months.
 The National Assembly shall, furthermore, meet in extraordinary
 session to consider a specific agenda if
 half plus one of its members, at least, addresses a written request to
 the President;
 - or on the initiative of the President of the Republic.
 The duration of an extraordinary session may not, however, exceed
 fifteen days except in the case stipulated in Article 57.
 Extraordinary sessions shall close as soon as the agenda has been ex-
 hausted.
 Art. 53. The right to vote of deputies shall be personal. Any binding
 instructions upon deputies shall be null and void.
 An organic law may, under exceptional circumstances, authorize the
 delegation of the vote. In this case, no member may be delegated more
 than one vote.
 Art. 54. If at the opening of a session, the quorum of one half plus one
 of the members composing the Assembly is not present, the meeting shall
 be adjourned until the third day following. The Assembly may then
 deliberate no matter how many are present.
 Art. 55. Meetings of the Assembly shall be public unless it decides
 otherwise. An in extenso report of the debates, together with the parlia-
 mentary documents, shall be published in the Journal Officiel.
 TITLE V
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EXECUTIVE AND
 THE LEGISLATIVE POWER
 Art. 56. The National Assembly shall hold the legislative power; it
 alone shall pass laws.
 Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to the citizens
 for the exercise of their public liberties; the obligations imposed by the
 national defense upon the persons and property of citizens;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts.
 inheritance and gifts;
 
 Senegal
 
 705
 
 
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefor, criminal procedure; amnesty; the creation of new
 juridical systems and the status of magistrates;
 - the basis, the rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all types;
 the issuance of currency.
 - the electoral system of the National Assembly and the local assemblies;
 - the establishment of categories of public institutions;
 - the fundamental guarantees granted to civil and military personnel
 employed by the State;
 - the nationalization of enterprises and the transfer of the property
 of enterprises from the public to the private sector.
 - Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of:
 - the general organization of national defense;
 - the free administration of local units, the extent of their jurisdiction
 and their resources;
 - education;
 - property rights, civil and commercial obligation;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security.
 - the system of remuneration for the officers of the State.
 The financial laws shall determine the financial resources and obli-
 gations of the State under the conditions and with the reservations to be
 provided for by an organic law. The establishment of new offices and the
 transformation of the existing ones may only take place within the frame-
 work of the financial laws.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives
 of the economic and social action of the State. The Plan shall be approved
 by law.
 The provisions of the present article may be developed in detail and
 amplified by an organic law.
 Furthermore, the President of the Republic may submit bills relating
 to other matters than those enumerated in this article to vote by the
 National Assembly, because of their social, economic or financial importan-
 ce, without derogating from the provisions of Article 65, paragraph 2.
 Article 57. The National Assembly shall pass the financial laws under
 the conditions stipulated in an organic law.
 The finance bill for the year, including the budget, shall be filed with
 the Secretariat of the Assembly at the latest on the opening day of the
 first ordinary session. The National Assembly shall vote finance bills
 within sixty days.
 Should the President of the Republic be unavoidably unable to file the
 finance bill in time for the Assembly to have, before the end of the session,
 the period of sixty days provided in the previous paragraph, the ordinary
 session shall be immediately and automatically followed by an extraordi-
 nary session whose duration shall be no longer than the time required to
 fulfil the time limit.
 
 706
 
 Senegal
 
 
 Should the finance bill not be passed definitively at the end of the time
 limit of sixty days provided above, the provisions of the bill shall be
 enforced by decree, taking into account the amendments voted by the
 National Assembly and accepted by the President of the Republic.
 If despite the procedure provided above, the finance bill, for the year
 has not entered into effect before the opening of the fiscal year, the
 President of the Republic shall be authorized to continue by decree the
 services already voted.
 The Supreme Court shall assist the Government and the National
 Assembly in supervising the implementation of the finance laws.
 Art. 58. Martial law or siege law shall be decreed by the President of the
 Republic. The National Assembly shall then meet automatically if it is not
 already in session. The decree proclaiming martial law or siege law shall
 be prorogued beyond twelve days only by authorization of the National
 Assembly after the matter has been referred to it by the President of the
 Republic.
 Art. 59. The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war.
 Art. 60. Laws adopted by the National Assembly shall be immediately
 transmitted to the President of the Republic.
 Art. 61. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws within
 fifteen days following the transmission to him of the finally adopted law.
 This time limit may be reduced to five days in case of urgency so declared
 by the National Assembly.
 Art. 62. The President of the Republic may, before the expiration of
 this time limit, ask the Assembly for a reconsideration which may not be
 refused. A law may be voted on second reading only if three fifths of the
 members composing the National Assembly have voted in favor.
 Art. 63. Within the time limits fixed for promulgation the President
 of the Republic may refer to the Supreme Court an appeal that the law be
 declared unconstitutional.
 Art. 64. The time limit for promulgation shall be suspended until the
 outcome of the second reading by the National Assembly or of the
 decision of the Supreme Court declaring the law in accordance with the
 Constitution. In any case, upon expiration of the time limits fixed by the
 Constitution, promulgation shall be automatic; it shall be executed by
 the President of the National Assembly.
 Art. 65. Matters other than those than fall within the domain of law
 according to this Constitution shall be of a regulatory character.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters may be modified by decree,
 if the Supreme Court has stated that they have a regulatory character
 as defined in the preceeding paragraph.
 Art. 66. The National Assembly may delegate to the President of the
 Republic or to a presidential commission of assignment, the power to take
 measures which normally fall within the domain of law.
 
 Senegal
 
 707
 
 
 An enabling law shall effect such delegation to the President of the
 Republic.
 Delegation to the commission of assignment, shall be effected by a
 resolution of the National Assembly and the President of the Republic
 shall be immediately advised thereof.
 Within the limitations of time and power stipulated by the enabling
 law, the President of the Republic shall issue ordinances which shall
 take effect upon publication but which shall become null and void if a bill
 of ratification is not filed with the secretariat of the National Assembly
 before the date stipulated in the enabling act.
 The National Assembly may amend the ordinances when it votes the
 ratification law.
 Within the limitations of time and power stipulated by the resolution
 provided for above, the commission of assignment shall take decisions
 which shall be promulgated as laws. These laws shall be filed with the
 secretariat of the National Assembly at the latest on the first day of the
 ordinary session following their promulgation. If they are not modified
 by the National Assembly in the first fifteen days of the session, they
 shall become final.
 Art. 67. Laws which the Constitution classifies as organic laws shall
 be passed and amended by an absolute majority of the members of
 the National Assembly.
 They may not be promulgated unless the Supreme Court, to which
 they must be referred by the President of the Republic, has declared them
 conformable to the Constitution.
 Article 65 shall not apply to organic laws.
 Art. 68. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the
 National Assembly by messages which he shall deliver himself or cause
 to be read, and which shall not be followed by any debate.
 Art. 69. The President of the Republic and the deputies to the National
 Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 Art. 70. Ministers and Secretaries of State may at any time be heard
 by the National Assembly and by the commissions. They may be assisted
 by Government Commissioners.
 Art. 71. Deputies and the President of the Republic alike shall have the
 right of amendment. Amendments proposed by the President of the
 Republic shall be presented by a Minister of a Secretary of State.
 Proposals and amendments by deputies may not be considered if their
 adoption would result either in the diminution of public resources or in an
 increase in public expenditures, unless they are accompanied by proposals
 for compensating revenues.
 Art. 72. If it appears during the legislative procedure that a bill or
 amendment does not fall with the domain of law, the Ministers and
 Secretaries of State may declare it inadmissible.
 
 708
 
 Senegal
 
 
 In case of disagreement between the executive and legislative branch,
 the Supreme Court at the request of one or the other, shall rule within
 eight days.
 . Art. 73. The President has the right, if he so requests, to priority
 inscription on the agenda of the National Assembly of a bill or a decla-
 ration of general policy.
 Art. 74. Deputies may question the Ministers and Secretaries of State
 orally or in writing, with or without debate, and the latter must reply.
 There shall be no vote on the questions or on the replies.
 Art. 75. The National Assembly may appoint commissions of inquiry
 from among its members. A law shall stipulate the conditions of organi-
 zation and operation and the powers of such commissions of inquiry.
 TITLE VI
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
 Art. 76. The President of the Republic shall negotiate international
 agreements. He shall ratify or approve them.
 Art. 77. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties or agreements
 relative to international organization, those that imply a commitment
 for the finances of the State, those that modify provisions of a legislative
 nature, those relative to the status of persons, those that call for the
 cession, exchange, or addition of territory, may be ratified or approved
 only by law.
 They shall go into effect only after having been ratified or approved.
 No cession, no addition of territory shall be valid without the consent of
 the populations concerned.
 Art. 78. If the Supreme Court shall declare that an international com-
 mitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization
 to ratify or approve this commitment may be given only after amendment
 of the Constitution.
 Art. 79. Treaties or agreements duly ratified or approved shall, upon
 their publication, have an authority superior to that of laws, subject,
 for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
 TITLE VII
 THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 80. The judicial authority, independent of the legislative and
 executive authorities, shall be exercised by the Supreme Court and by the
 courts and tribunals.
 Judges shall, in the exercise of their functions, be subject only to the law.
 
 Senegal
 
 709
 
 
 Magistrates may not be removed from office. They shall be appointed
 after consulting with the High Council of the Judiciary.
 An organic law shall determine the jurisdiction, organization and
 operation of the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 81. The judicial authority shall be the guardian of the rights and
 liberties defined by the Constitution and by law.
 Art. 82. The Supreme Court shall take cognizance of the consti-
 tutionality of laws and international commitments as well as of conflicts of
 jurisdiction between the executive and legislative powers. It shall judge
 any excessive use of power by the executive authorities.
 Art. 83. Except in flagrante delicto judges of the Supreme Court may
 not be prosecuted, arrested, detained or tried in criminal matters except
 with the authorization of the Secretariat of the Court. The latter may
 assign jurisdiction to a particular court.
 Art. 84. An organic law shall stipulate the other powers of the Supreme
 Court, its organization, and the proceedings to be followed before it.
 TITLE VIII
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 85. A High Court of Justice shall be instituted.
 Art. 86. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of members
 elected by the National Assembly from among its deputies the beginning
 of each legislature. It shall be presided over by a Judge. An organic law
 shall determine the organization of the High Court of Justice and the
 procedure to be followed before it.
 Art. 87. The President of the Republic shall not be held accountable
 for actions performed in the exercise of his office except in the case of
 high treason. He may be indicted only by the National Assembly ruling
 by vote in secret balloting and by a majority of three fifths of its members;
 he shall be tried by the High Court of Justice.
 The Ministers and Secretaries of State shall be criminally liable for
 actions performed in the exercise of their office and deemed to be crimes
 or misdemeanors at the time they were committed. The procedure defined
 above shall be applied to them, as well as to their accomplices, in case of a
 conspiracy against the security of the State. In the cases provided for
 by the present paragraph, the High Court shall be bound by the definition
 of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as by the determination of penalties,
 as they are established by the criminal laws in force when the acts are
 committed.
 
 710
 
 Senegal
 
 
 TITLE IX
 ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
 Art. 88. The Economic and Social Council shall give its advice on
 matters referred to it by the President of the Republic or by the National
 Assembly.
 The composition of the Economic and Social Council, its organization
 and its rules of procedure shall be determined by an organic law.
 TITLE X
 AMENDMENT
 Art. 89. The President of the Republic and the deputies alike shall
 have the initiative in amendment of the Constitution.
 No bill of amendment adopted by the National Assembly shall become
 definitive before it has been approved by a referendum.
 However, a bill of amendment shall not be submitted to a referendum
 if the President of the Republic decides to submit it only to the National
 Assembly. In such a case the bill of amendment shall not be approved
 unless it receives a majority of three fifths of the members composing
 the National Assembly.
 Article 66 shall not be applicable to constitutional laws.
 The Republican system of the State may not be the subject of amendment.
 TITLE XII
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 90. The incumbent President of the Republic shall, until the
 election of a new President of the Republic to take place at the same time
 as the election of a new National Assembly, hold the powers provided in
 this Constitution.
 Art. 91. The incumbent National Assembly shall, until the end of
 its term, exercise the powers provided in this Constitution. However, the
 mandate of this Assembly may be shortened by decree of the President
 of the Republic.
 Art. 92. The legislative measures necessary for the setting up of the
 institutions shall be taken by the President of the Republic after con-
 sulation with the Supreme Court, in the form of ordinances having the
 force of law.
 Art. 93. The laws and regulations presently in effect shall remain in
 effect insofar as they are not contrary to this Constitution and have not
 been modified or abrogated.
 
 Senegal
 
 711
 
 
</pre>
