REPUBLIC OF MALAWI (CONSTITUTION) ACT 1966

Printed and Published by the Government Printer, Zomba

MALAWI GOVERNMENT

Act No. 23 of 1966

I assent, GLYN JONES Governor-General 14th June, 1966

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

SECTION

     1. Citation and commencement

     2. Interpretation

     3. Revocation and repeal of specified existing laws

     4. Establishment of Constitution

     5. Existing laws

     6. Existing offices

     7. The National Assembly

     8. Constituencies and Voters’ Roll

     0. Transitional provisions

    10. Prerogatives and privileges

    11. Succession to property by the Government

    12. Continuance of rights, liabilities and obligations

    13. Confirmation of titles and interest in land, etc.

    14. Legal proceedings

    15. Exercise of jurisdiction of High Court and other courts First Schedule Provisions revoked or repealed

Second Schedule Constitution of the Republic of Malawi


Cap. 1

An Act to constitute the Republic of Malawi and to provide for matters incidental thereto or connected therewith

ENACTED by the Parliament of Malawi

1.     This Act may be cited as the Republic of Malawi (Constitution) Act, 1966, and shall come into operation on the 6th July, 1966.

  2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires 

    “ the appointed day ” means the 6th day of July, 1966;

    “ the Constitution ” means the Constitution established by section 4, and set forth in the Second Schedule;

    “ the existing laws ” means all Acts, Orders in Council, laws, rules, regulations, resolutions, orders or other instruments in writing having the effect of law in any part of Malawi immediately before the appointed day;

    “ the former Protectorate ” means the former Protectorate of Nyasaland;

    “ the Government ” means the authority, for the time being, in which is vested (whether before or after the appointed day) the executive power of Malawi.

  (2)   Except where the context otherwise requires, expressions used in this Act have the same meaning as in the Constitution, and the provisions of section 98 of the Constitution shall apply for the purposes of interpreting this Act as they apply for the purposes of interpreting the Constitution.

  (3)   Except where expressly otherwise provided, the Interpretation and General Clauses Ordinance shall apply, with any necessary adaptations, for the purpose of interpreting the Constitution, and otherwise in relation thereto, as it applies for the purpose of interpreting, and in relation to, Ordinances or Acts of Parliament.

   3. The existing laws specified in Column 1 of the First Revocation Schedule are revoked or repealed to the extent specified in “ deemed Column 2 of the Schedule.                                     

existing laws

   4.    Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Constitution Establish shall come into effect in Malawi on the appointed day. 
   5.    (I) Subject to the provisions of this section, and so far Existing as is consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, the laws existing laws shall continue in force after the appointed day as if they had been made in pursuance of the Constitution, but they shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with the Constitution, and in particular any reference therein to the Crown shall be construed as a reference to the Government.

   (2)   The President may, by an order under his hand made at any time before the 6th July, 1967, make such amendments to any existing law as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for bringing that law into conformity with the provisions of this Act or the Constitution, or otherwise for enabling effect to be given to those provisions.

   (3)   Where any matter that falls to be prescribed or otherwise provided for under the Constitution by Parliament or by any other authority or person is prescribed or provided for by or under an existing law (including any amendment to any such law made under this section) or is otherwise prescribed or provided for immediately before the appointed day, by or under the provisions revoked or repealed by section 3 of this Act, that prescription or provision shall, as from the appointed day, have effect as if it had been made under the Constitution by Parliament or, as the case may be, by the other authority or person.

   (4)   The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any powers conferred by this Act or the Constitution upon any person or authority to make provision for any matter, including the amendment or repeal of any existing law.
            Existing offices

The National Assembly

6.    (1) Where any office has been established by or under the provisions revoked by section 3 of this Act and the Constitution establishes a similar or an equivalent office, any person who immediately before the appointed day holds or is acting in the former office shall, so far as is consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, be deemed to have been appointed, elected or designated as from the appointed day to hold or to act in the latter office in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and to have taken any necessary oath under the Constitution:

              Provided that any person who, under the provisions revoked by section 3 of this Act or under any existing law, would have been required to vacate his office at the expiration of any period or on the attainment of any age shall vacate his office at the expiration of that period or upon the attainment of that age.

              (2)   The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to 

                 (а) the provisions of section 7; and

                 (б)   any powers conferred by or under the Constitution upon any person or authority to make provision for the abolition of offices or the removal of persons holding or acting in any office.

              7.     (1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the National Assembly constituted by the provisions revoked by section 3 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the existing National Assembly ”) shall be the National Assembly during the period beginning on the appointed day and ending on the first dissolution of Parliament thereafter and shall be deemed to have been constituted under section 19 of the Constitution.

              (2)   The persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are the members of the existing National Assembly, and who represent general roll constituencies in the Assembly, shall continue to be the members of the National Assembly and, as from the appointed day, shall be deemed to have been elected to the National Assembly to represent the same constituencies as the constituencies for which they were respectively elected under the provisions of the Nyasaland (Electoral Provisions) Order in Council, 1964, and shall hold their seats in the National Assembly in accordance with sections 23 and 28 of the Constitution.

              (3)   The Special Roll constituencies constituted and delimited by the Nyasaland (Electoral Provisions) Order in Council, 1964, and the Regulations made thereunder shall cease to exist upon the appointed day, and the persons representing any of those constituencies on that day shall thereupon cease to be elected members of the National Assembly.

               (4)   The persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the existing National Assembly shall continue to be, respectively, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly after the appointed day and, as from that time, shall be deemed to have been elected as such in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and shall hold office in accordance with those provisions.

               (5)   The Rules and Standing Orders of the existing National Assembly as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until it is otherwise provided under section 42 of the Constitution, be the rules and procedure of the National Assembly but shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with the Constitution.

              (6)   Subject to the provisions of section 45 (6) of the Constitution, Parliament shall, unless sooner dissolved, stand dissolved on the 7th July, 1971, and section 45 (5) of the Constitution shall be construed accordingly.

              (7)   Any person who, under the provisions of this section, continues to be Speaker, Deputy Speaker or a member of the National Assembly after the appointed day shall be deemed to have taken any necessary oath under the Constitution.

              (8)   All moneys granted, voted or appropriated by the existing National Assembly to the service of the Government for the current financial year shall be deemed to have been granted, voted or appropriated by the National Assembly established by section 19 of the Constitution, and in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.                             
Constituencies and Voters’ Roll

Transitional

provisions

Prerogatives

and

privileges

                8.    (1) Until other provision is made under section 31 of the Constitution, the boundaries of the fifty constituencies into which Malawi is divided by that section shall be the boundaries of the general roll constituencies established under the provisions of the Nyasaland (Electoral Provisions) Order in Council, 1964, as delimited immediately before the appointed day.

                (2)   For the purpose of section 31 of the Constitution, the date upon which the Electoral Commission shall be deemed to have last reviewed the boundaries of the constituencies into which Malawi is divided for the purposes of that section shall be the 1st April, 1964.

                  (3)     Subject to the provisions of section 29 of the Constitution, every person who immediately before the appointed day is registered in any constituency as a voter in elections of members to the National Assembly shall continue to be so registered after the appointed day, until such time as a new or revised roll of voters shall have been prepared after the appointed day under an Act of Parliament.

                9.    (1) All rights and obligations under conventions, treaties or agreements which were exercisable by or binding upon the Government immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be so exercisable and binding.

                (2)   All functions which immediately prior to the appointed day were vested in the Governor-General or in any other authority, shall as far as the same continue in existence and are capable of being exercised after the appointed day be vested in the President, or in the authority exercising similar functions under the Constitution, as the case may be, except such functions as are by this Act or any other law vested in some other authority.

                10.    Where under any existing law, constitutional custom or convention any prerogatives or privileges are vested in Her Majesty in respect of Malawi or in the Governor-General on behalf of Her Majesty, they shall with effect from the appointed day vest in the President and, subject to the provisions of the Constitution or any other law, the President shall have power to do all things necessary for the exercise thereof.
          
    11.    Subject to the provisions of this Act, and the Constitution, all property of every nature and kind whatsoever and all assets that, immediately before the appointed day, were vested in, or held in trust for, Her Majesty or the Governor-General or in any other person in right of the Government of Malawi, shall on and after the appointed day be vested in or, as the case may be, held in trust for the Government:

    Provided that such vesting or trust interest shall be subject to 

      (a)  any rights in respect of any property or assets referred to in this section that, by or under any law, were granted, leased or otherwise disposed of to, or were recognized as being vested in, any person before the appointed day and that were subsisting immediately before the appointed day; and

      (b)  any rights in respect of any property or assets referred to in this section that may, subject to any law, be granted, leased or otherwise disposed of to, or in trust for, any person on or after the appointed day by the Government, or by any person authorized in that behalf by the Government or by or under any law.

    12.    All rights, liabilities and obligations, howsoever arising, of Her Majesty, the Governor-General or any public officer in respect of the Government of Malawi before the appointed day shall, on and after the appointed day, be rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government.

    13.    All estates, interests or rights in or over land, minerals or mineral oils which the Governor of the former Protectorate, the Governor-General or any other officer or authority, acting in exercise or purported exercise of any power in that behalf conferred by any law, had at any time before the appointed day validly created, granted or recognized, are hereby confirmed.

Succession

to

property by the Government

Continuance of rights, liabilities and

obligations

Confirmation of titles and interests in land, etc.



                          
Legal         14. (1) All proceedings that, immediately before the

proceedings appointed day, are pending before any court established by or under the provisions revoked by section 3 may be continued and concluded after the appointed day before the corresponding court established by or under the Constitution.

            (2)   Any decision, order or sentence given before the appointed day by any such court as aforesaid shall, for the purpose of its enforcement or for the purpose of any appeal therefrom, have effect after the appointed day as if it were a decision of the corresponding court established by or under the Constitution.

Exercise of 15. Until Parliament otherwise provides, the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Appeal, the Court and High Court and of all subordinate courts (including Local other courts Courts) shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and of any law in force in Malawi, be exercised in conformity with the existing laws and the substance of the common law and the doctrines of equity.

Section 3           THE FIRST SCHEDULE

Provisions Revoked or Repealed by This Act

The Malawi Independence Order, All sections, other than sections 11 916 1064 and 12 of the Order and sections 105 and 106 of the Constitution of Malawi set out in Schedule 2 to that Order.                          
No. 1 of 1964 The Constitution of Malawi     The whole Act.                       
              (Amendment) Act, 1964                                               
No. 41 of     The Constitution of Malawi     The whole Act.                       
1966          (Amendment) Act, 1966                                               
No. 49 of     The Constitution of Malawi     The whole Act                        
1966          (Amendment) (No. 2)                                                 
              Act, 1966                                                           
8.1. 1964    The Nyasaland (Electoral       The whole Order                      
269            Provisions) Order in Council,                                      
1984

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

Chapter I The Republic

    section

       1.  Declaration of the Republic

       2.  Fundamental principles of Government

       3.  The national territory

       4.  Malawi a One-Party State

       5.  Declaration of the national flag 
	
	6. The Chiefs

Chapter II Citizenship

       7.  Continuation of citizenship of Malawi after the appointed day

Chapter III The President

       8.  The office of President

       9.  The first President

       10.  Election of President

       11.  Establishment of Electoral College to select the presidential candidate

       12.  Term of office of President and when vacancy arises

       13.  Temporary provision for vacancy in office of President

       14.  Committee of appointment

       15.  Performance of functions of President during his absence or illness

       16.  Salary and allowances of President

       17.  Presidential and other oaths of office

Chapter IV Parliament

       18.  Establishment of Parliament

       19.  Composition of National Assembly

       20.  Nominated members

       21.  Election of members of National Assembly

       22.  Direction and supervision of registration of voters and conduct of elections

       23.  Qualifications for election to National Assembly

       24.  Disqualifications for election to National Assembly

             SECTION

                25.  Speaker

                26.  Deputy Speaker

                27.  Right of attendance of Ministers

                28.  Tenure of office of members of National Assembly

                29.  The franchise

                30.  Electoral Commission

                31.  Constituencies

                32.  Determination of questions as to membership of National Assembly

                33.  Clerk to National Assembly and his staff

                34.  Interpretation

                35.  Exercise of legislative power of Parliament

                36.  Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures

                37.  The President’s rights in the National Assembly

                38.  Oaths to be taken by Speaker, Members and Clerk

                39.  Presiding in National Assembly

                40.  Quorum in National Assembly

                41.  Voting in National Assembly

                42.  Regulation of procedure in National Assembly

                43.  Official language

                44.  Sessions of Parliament

                45.  Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament

                46.  Sittings of National Assembly

Chapter V Executive Power of Malawi

                47.  Executive authority of Malawi

                48.  Command of armed forces

                49.  Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries

                50.  Appointment of Ministers not being members of the National Assembly

                51.  Oaths of Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries

                52.  Special provisions during a dissolution of Parliament

                53.  Cabinet

                64.  Responsibility of Ministers

                65.  Secretary to Cabinet 56. Attorney General

                67. Permanent Secretaries

                58.  Director of Public Prosecutions

                59.  Special provisions relating to persons acting as Attorney-General,

                     Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor-General

                60.  President’s power of pardon, remission etc.

                61.  Advisory Committee
                                
Chapter VI The Judicature SECTION

   02.  High Court

   03.  Appointment of judges of High Court

   04.  Tenure of office of judges

   05.  Oaths to be taken by judges 00. Acting judges

   07.  Supreme Court of Appeal

   08.  Appeals to Supreme Court of Appeal

   09.  Appeals from subordinate courts

   70.  Supervisory jurisdiction of High Court

   71.  Judicial Service Commission

   72.  Appointment, etc. of judicial officers

Chapter VII Finance

   73.  Taxation to be imposed only under law

   74.  Consolidated Fund

   75.  Withdrawals from Consolidated Fund

   70. Expenditure charged on Consolidated Fund

   77.  Annual Financial Statements

   78.  Appropriation Bills

   79.  Supplementary and excess expenditure

   80.  Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation

   81.  Contingencies Fund

   82.  Raising of loans by Government

   83.  Special funds and trust moneys

   84.  Development Fund

   85.  The Auditor-General and his functions

Chapter VIII The Public Service 80. Public Service Commission

   87.  Appointment, etc., of public officers

   88.  Appointment of Director of Public Prosecutions

   89.  Principal representatives of Malawi abroad

   90.  Appointment of Permanent Secretaries, etc.

   91.  Police Service Commission

   92.  Appointment of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of

        Police

   93.  Appointment, etc., of police officers

   94.  Laws with respect to police discipline

   95.  Regulations for the public service

Chapter IX Miscellaneous

   96.  Resignations

   97.  Amendment of Constitution

   98.  Interpretation                                          
Declaration of the Republic

Fundamental principles of Government

CHAPTER I The Republic

           1.    (1) Malawi shall on the appointed day become a sovereign democratic Republic.

           (2)  Except as otherwise provided by or under this Constitution, the powers of the Republic of Malawi derive from the people of Malawi and shall, subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution, be vested in persons who are elected by and responsible to the people of Malawi.

           2.    (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Government of the Republic shall be founded upon the following principles 

             (i)   The four corner-stones of the Government and the Nation shall be Unity, Loyalty, Obedience and Discipline;

             (ii)  The paramount duty of the Government shall be to promote, safeguard and advance the welfare of the people of Malawi;

             (iii) The Government and the people of Malawi shall continue to recognize the sanctity of the personal liberties enshrined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and of adherence to the Law of Nations;

             (iv)  No person should be deprived of his property without payment of fair compensation, and only where the public interest so requires;

             (v)   All persons regardless of colour, race or creed should enjoy equal rights and freedoms;

             (vi)  Recognition of the need for the ultimate unification of the peoples of Africa, for their common welfare and advancement.

            (2)   Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1) to the extent that the law in question is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety or public order.

  3. The national territory of the Republic shall consist of all the territory which was comprised in Malawi immediately before the appointed day, and shall include all the islands, inland waters and air space of Malawi, and shall include any territory lawfully acquired thereafter by adjustment of boundaries or otherwise.

  4. (1) There shall be in the Republic after the appointed day only one National Party.

  (2) The National Party shall be the Malawi Congress Party.

   5.  (1) The National Flag of which the design is described in subsection (2) is hereby declared to be the National Flag of Malawi.

   (2) The design of the National Flag shall be 

   from the top of the Flag to the bottom thereof, three equal horizontal stripes of black, red and green with a red rising sun superimposed in the centre of the black stripe.

   6.   The institution of Chieftaincy shall be recognized and preserved in the Republic, so that the Chiefs may make the fullest contribution to the welfare and development of the country in their traditional fields.

                                              CHAPTER II Citizenship

  7. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law, every person who immediately before the appointed day was under any existing law a citizen of Malawi, shall continue to be a citizen of the Republic after the appointed day.

The office of President

          (2)    Parliament may make provision by Act of Parliament for the acquisition of citizenship, or loss of citizenship, of the Republic by any person after the appointed day.

         (3) In this section, the expression 

           “ acquisition of citizenship ” includes acquisition by birth, registration, naturalization or any other means prescribed by Parliament;

           “ loss of citizenship ” includes loss by deprivation, renunciation or any other means prescribed by Parliament.

CHAPTER III

The President

        8. (1) There shall be a President who shall be the Head of State, the supreme executive authority of the Republic, and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

        (2)   The President shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, have power 

          (а)   to constitute offices for the Republic, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment;

          (б)   to appoint, accredit, receive and recognize ambassadors and other diplomatic officers, consuls and other agents;

          (c) to confer honours and decorations;

          (d) to exercise the prerogative of mercy; and

          (e)   generally to exercise all such other functions as are by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament conferred upon or vested in the President.

         (3)   Except as may otherwise be provided by an Act of Parliament, in the exercise of his functions the President shall act in his own discretion and shall not be obliged to follow advice tendered by any other person.

   9. The first President, having been duly elected to that office in accordance with the provisions of the Election of the First President of the Republic Act, 1966, shall be Ngwazi Dr. Hastings Kamuzu Banda.

           Whenever Parliament is dissolved, or the office of President becomes vacant, an election shall be held to the office of President in such manner as, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

   (2) A person shall be qualified for election as President if, and shall not be so qualified unless he 

     (a) is a citizen of the Republic;

     (b) has attained the age of 45 years;

     (c) is qualified as a voter for the purposes of elections to the National Assembly; and

     (d) is a member of the Party.

   11. (1) There shall be an Electoral College for the purpose of nominating, for any election taking place after the appointed day, a candidate for the office of President.

   (2) The Electoral College shall consist of the following persons 

     (a)   The Members of the National Executive Committee of the Party;

     (b)   The Members of the National Committee of the League of Malawi Women;

     (c)   The Members of the National Committee of the League of Malawi Youth;

     (d)   The Members of the Regional Committees of the Party;

     (e)   The Chairmen, Secretaries and Treasurers of all District Committees of the Party;

     (f) The Chairmen, Secretaries and Treasurers of all District Committees of the League of Malawi Women;

     (g)   The Chairmen, Secretaries and Treasurers of all District Committees of the League of Malawi Youth;

The first President

No. 22 of 1966

Election of President

Establishment of Electoral College to select the presidential candidate

     

                               
                (h)    All Members of Parliament, except in the case where Parliament has been dissolved;

                (i) All Chiefs recognized as full Native Authorities; and

                (j) All Chairmen of District Councils.

              (3)   The Chairman of the Electoral College shall be a person other than a person who is a candidate for nomination, and shall be appointed by the members of the National Executive Committee of the Party.

Term of office of President and when vacancy arises

             12. (1) Subject to subsection (2), the President shall continue in office until another person is elected to the office of President.

             (2) The office of President shall become vacant on 

                (a)  the death or resignation of the holder of the office;

                (b)    the rejection at a Presidential election of a holder of the office who has been nominated for re-election.

 13. (1) Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of provision President, or the President is so incapacitated as to be in office unable to appoint a Presidential Commission, the functions of President Gf that office shall be performed by a Presidential Council consisting of 

               (a) the Secretary-General of the Party;

Committee of appointment

    (b)   two Cabinet Ministers, each of whom is also a member of the National Executive Committee of the Party (in this Chapter referred to as “ the National Executive Committee ”) appointed by a Committee of Appointment in accordance with the provisions of section

 14.

 (2) A Presidential Council shall hold office until a new President assumes office.        

 14 (1) Whenever under the provisions of section 13 (1) ^ it becomes necessary to appoint a Presidential Council, the Secretary-General shah forthwith convene a joint meeting of the National Executive Committee and all Cabinet Ministers (hereinafter referred to as “ the Committee of Appointment ”) for the purpose of appointing two Cabinet Ministers, duly qualified in terms of section 13, to a Presidential Council.

       (2)   The Committee of Appointment when convened shall appoint, in accordance with such procedure, if any, as may be prescribed by an Act of Parliament, two Cabinet Ministers (each of whom is also a member of the National Executive Committee) to be members of the Presidential Council.

       (3)   Where, after a Presidential Council has been appointed any member thereof is for any reason unable to perform his duties, the Committee of Appointment may appoint another duly qualified person in his place.

                Whenever the President considers it desirable by reason of illness, temporary absence from the Republic or any other cause which prevents him from performing the functions of the office of President, he may by directions in writing appoint three Cabinet Ministers to be a Presidential Commission to perform such functions of the office of President as, subject to the provisions of subsection (5), he may specify in those directions.

       (2)   The President shall appoint a person to be Chairman of the Commission, and may specify that the Chairmanship shall change from time to time during the period in which the Commission performs its functions.

       (3)   The Presidential Commission may act by any two of its members.

       (4)   When the circumstances requiring the appointment of a Presidential Commission under this section have come to an end, the Commission shall be automatically dissolved.

        (5)   Where a Commission has performed any functions under this section, the President may within a period of 30 days after resuming office revoke or vary any decision made by the Commission which, but for the provisions of this subsection, would be irrevocable.

(6)    Where a Presidential Commission has been appointed and is still in being when a vacancy occurs in the office of President, then until a Presidential Council is appointed, the Presidential Commission shall continue to exercise the functions of the office of President in accordance with the provisions of this section.

                   (7)   The Presidential Commission shall not exercise the powers of the President to dissolve Parliament.

                  16* (1) The President shall receive such salary and allowances and on retirement such pension, gratuity or other allowance as may from time to time be determined by the National Assembly.

                  (2)   The salary and allowances of the President shall not without his consent be reduced during his period of office.

                  (3)   The salary, allowances and pension or gratuity of the President shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.

                  17. (1) The President shall assume office by taking an Oath in the following form, which shall be administered in public by the Chief Justice 

                     “ I .............................-....,  do  solemnly

                  swear that I will well and truly perfo m the functions of the high office of President of the Republic of Malawi, and that I will preserve and defend the Constitution, and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. So help me God.”.

                  (2)   Every member of a Presidential Council or Presidential Commission shall, before assuming the duties of the office, take an Oath of Allegiance and such Oath for the due performance of office, as may be prescribed by Parliament.

                  (3)   Instead of taking an oath the President, or any person to whom the provisions of subsection (2) apply, may, if he thinks fit, make an affirmation which shall be in the like form with the substitution of affirm for swear, and the omission of the final sentence.

CHAPTER IV Parliament Part I Composition of Parliament

There shall be a Parliament of the Republic which shall consist of the President and the National Parliament Assembly.

   (2) The legislative power of the Republic shall vest in the Parliament.

19* (1) The National Assembly shall consist of elected members; and


  (b) such nominated members as may be appointed under the provisions of section 20.

   (2) If a person who is not a member of the National Assembly is e;ected to the office of Speaker of the Assembly that person shall, by virtue of holding that office, be a member of the Assembly in addition to the members referred to in subsection (1).

   20. The President may appoint as nominated members Nominated of the National Assembly such persons, not exceeding five in members number, as he considers desirable so to do in order to enhance the representative character of the Assembly, or to represent particular minority or other special interests in the Republic.

   21* (1) Each of the  constituencies provided for in section 31 shall elect one member to the National Assembly in such manner as, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

   (2) Every person who is registered in any constituency as a voter for elections of members to the National Assembly shall be entitled so to vote in that constituency in accordance with the provisions of any law in that behalf, and no other person may so vote,

Direction and supervision of registration of voters and conduct of elections Qualifications for Election to National Assembly

                22 The registration of voters in elections of members of the National Assembly and the conduct of such elections shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Electoral Commission.

                23.     Subject to the provisions of section 24, a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he 

(a)   is a citizen of the Republic who has attained the age of 25 years unless, in any particular case, the President shall specify the age of 21 years;

(b)   is able to speak and to read the English language well enough to take an active part in the proceedings of the Assembly;

(c) is registered as a voter in a constituency; and

(d) is a member of the Party.

 Disqualifications for Election to National Assembly

24. (1) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly who 

                  (a)    is under a declaration of allegiance to some country other than the Republic;

                 (b)   is, under any law in force in the Republic, adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind;

                (c)  is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in the Republic either before or after the appointed day, or under a sentence of imprisonment (by whatever name called) imposed on him at any such time by any such a court or substituted by competent authority for some other sentence imposed on him by such a court;

                  (d)   is detained under a detention order or is subject to a control order or a restriction order; or

                  (e)   is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in the Republic.
      (2)   No person who holds the office of President, or who has been nominated as a candidate for that office under the provisions of section 11, shall be qualified for election as a member of the National Assembly.

      (3)   Parliament may provide that, subject to such exceptions and limitations (if any) as may be prescribed by law, a person shall be disqualified for membership of the National Assembly by virtue of 

        (a)   his holding or acting in any office or appointment that may be prescribed by Parliament;

        (b)   his belonging to any of the armed forces or to any police force;

        (c)   his having been convicted by any court of any offence that is prescribed by Parliament and that is connected with elections of the President or of the members of the National Assembly:

      Provided that in any such case the period of disqualification shall not exceed a period of 7 years from the date of such conviction; or

        (d)   his having been required to vacate his seat in the Assembly under the provisions of section 28 (2) (g):

        Provided that in any case under this paragraph the period of disqualification shall not exceed a period of five years from the date when such person was required to vacate his seat.

    25. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the Assembly who shall be elected by the Assembly, from among persons who are members of the Assembly or who are qualified to be elected as such.

     (2) The President, a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, or any person holding or acting in any office that is for the purposes of this section prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, shall not be qualified to be elected as Speaker.


        (3)    The Speaker shall vacate his office---                     
        (а)    if, having been elected from among the members             
        of the National Assembly, he ceases to be a member of             
        the Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution            
        of the Assembly;               
        (b)    if any circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would disqualify him for office as such;                   
        (c) when the Assembly first site-after-any dissolution of Parliament
	(d)    if the Assembly, by a resolution supported by the          
        votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members              
        thereof, resolves that he be removed from office.                 
        (4)    No business shall be transacted in the National            
        Assembly at any time when the office of Speaker is vacant.                 
  26. (1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Speaker Assembly who shall be elected from among the persons who are members of the Assembly other than Ministers, Parliamentary Secretaries, or persons holding or acting in any office that is for the purposes of this section prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.                                    
        (2)    The members of the National Assembly shall elect a         
        person to the office of Deputy Speaker when the Assembly          
        first sits after any dissolution of Parliament and, if the office 
        becomes vacant otherwise than by reason of the dissolution        
        of Parliament, at the first sitting of the Assembly after the     
        office becomes vacant.                                            
        (3)    The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office              
        (а)    if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly;                                                           
        (б)    if he assumes the office of President;                     
        (c) if he becomes a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary           
        or a person holding or acting in any office prescribed            
        under the provisions of subsection (1);                           
                          
           (d) if he is deemed as Speaker; or

           (e)   if the Assembly, by a resolution supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof, resolves that he be removed from office.

        27.    A Minister who is not a member of the National Assembly may attend and take part in the proceedings of the Assembly or of any committee of the Assembly, but nothing in this section shall entitle a person who is not a member of the Assembly to vote in the Assembly or any of its committees.

        28. (1) Every member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat in the Assembly upon a dissolution of Parliament.

        (2)  A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat in the Assembly and cease to be a member thereof 

          (a)     if, being an elected member, he ceases to be a citizen of the Republic;

          (b) if he assumes the office of President;

          (c)   if he is absent from the sittings of the Assembly for such period and in such circumstances as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly;

          (d)   if he is sentenced by a court in the Republio to death or to imprisonment (by whatever name called) for a term exceeding twelve months;

          (e)   subject to the provisions of subsection (4), if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified for election as such under section 24 (1) (a), (6), (d) or (e), or under any law made by Parliament under the provisions of section 24;

          (/) if, having as a Parliamentary candidate made a declaration at the next previous Parliamentary election that he supported the President as the Presidential candidate, he votes against the President on the taking in the National Assembly of a motion of confidence in the Government;

Right of attendance of Ministers

Tenure of office of members of National Assembly

                   (g)  if his seat becomes vacant under any law made by Parliament providing for a seat in the Assembly to become vacant by reason of the failure of a member to retain the confidence and support of a majority of the voters in the constituency where he was elected;

                   (h)  if, in the case of an elected member, the Secretary-General has notified the Speaker in writing that he has ceased to be a member of the Party; or

                   (») if, being a member appointed under section 20, the President so directs.

                 (3)  The Speaker shall give notice in the Gazette of the fact that the seat of any member of the Assembly has become vacant under this section.

                 (4)  Parliament may, in order to permit any member of the National Assembly who has been sentenced to death or imprisonment, adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, adjudged or declared bankrupt or convicted of any offence prescribed under section 24 to appeal against the decision in accordance with any law, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament, the decision shall not have effect for the purpose of this section until such time as may be so prescribed.

                 (5)   For the purposes of this section, two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentences if none of those sentences exceeds twelve months.

                  29. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section and any other law, every citizen of the Republic who has attained the age of twenty-one years shall be entitled to be registered under an Act made in that behalf as a voter for the purposes of elections of members to the National Assembly, and no other person may so be registered.

                  (2)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (3), a person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter in a constituency if, and shall not be so qualified unless, at the date of his application for registration he                       
            (а) is a citizen of the Republic;

            (б) has attained the age of twenty-one years;

            (c)  is ordinarily resident in the Republic and has been ordinarily resident in the Republic at any time for a continuous period of two years; and

            (d)   is ordinarily resident in that constituency or was born there or is employed or carries on a business there.

          (3)   No person shall be qualified for registration as a voter in a constituency 

            (а)   if he is, under any law in force in the Republic, adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind;

            (б)   if he is under sentence of death imposed on him by a court having jurisdiction in the Republic, either before or after the appointed day;

            (c)  if under any law made by Parliament he is disqualified for registration as a voter on the grounds of his having been convicted of an offence connected with elections, or for infringement of the provisions of subsection (4).

          (4)   Where any person is qualified to be registered in more than one constituency as a voter he may be so registered only in one constituency.

          30. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two or more than four other members, and shall exercise such functions in relation to elections as may be conferred upon it by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament.

          (2)   The members of the Electoral Commission shall be appointed by the President.

          (3)   A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a member of the Electoral Commission if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, a member of the National Assembly or a public officer.

          (4)   Subject to the provisions of this section, a member of the Electoral Commission shall vacate his office 

            (a)   at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; o                            
                  (b)   if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such.

                (5)   A member of the Electoral Commission may be removed from office by the President, on the grounds of inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.
  31. (1) For the purposes of elections to the National Assembly, the Republic shall be divided into constituencies in such manner as the Electoral Commission acting with the approval of the National Assembly signified by resolution, may prescribe.

                (2)   So far as appears to the Electoral Commission practicable and subject to subsection (3), every constituency shall contain the number of voters registered on the voters roll that is equal to the electoral quota in respect of the voters roll.

               (3)   The Electoral Commission may depart from the principles specified in subsection (2) to such extent as it considers expedient in order to take account of 

                  (а) the density of population;

                  (б) the means of communication;

                  (c) geographical features; and

                  (d) the boundaries of existing administrative areas.


                 (4)   The Electoral Commission shall review the boundaries of all constituencies at intervals of not less than three nor more than five years, and may alter the boundaries of the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this section.

 (5) Any alteration of the constituencies under this section shall come into effect upon such date as the President may by Order direct.
         (6) For the purposes of this section the electoral quota in respect of the roll of voters shall be the number ascertained by dividing the number of voters for the time being registered throughout the Republic on that roll by fifty.                   ,

          32. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether 

            (a)   any person has been validly elected as a member of the National Assembly or the seat of any such member has become vacant;

Determination of questions as to membership of National Assembly

           (b)   any person that has been validly elected as Speaker of the Assembly among persons who are not members of the Assembly or, having been so elected vacated the office of Speaker.

         (2) Parliament may make provision with respect to 

           (a)   the persons who may apply to the High Court for the determination of any question under this section;

           (b)   the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon which any such application may be made; and

            (c)  the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to any such application.

         (3)    The determination by the High Court of any question under this section shall not be subject to appeal.

          33. (1) There shall be a Clerk to the National Assembly
          (2) Unless Parliament by Resolution otherwise provides, the office of the Clerk to the National Assembly and the 18 offices of the members of his staff shall be public offices.

         34.  In this Part of this Chapter                     
           “sentence of imprisonment” shall be construed as not including a sentence of imprisonment the execution of which is suspended, or a sentence of imprisonment imposed in default of payment of a fine; and “ belonging to any of the armed forces or to any police force ” shall be construed as not including a person who is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service in any such forces or force.                                            
Exercise of legislative power of Parliament

Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures

  Part 2 Legislation and Procedure in National Assembly

  35.    (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good government of the Republic.

  (2)   Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the legislative power of Parliament shall be exercised by Bills passed by the National Assembly and assented to by the President.

  (3)   Where a Bill is presented to the President for his assent he shall either assent or withhold his assent.

  (4)   Where the President withholds his assent to a Bill, the Bill shall be returned to the Speaker by the President with a notification that the President’s assent has been withheld, and the Bill shall not be again debated by the National Assembly until after the expiry of twenty -one days from the date of the withholding of the President’s assent.

  (5)   If the Bill is debated again and passed by the National Assembly at any time between the date of the expiry of the twenty-one days referred to in subsection (4) and six months from that date, the Bill shall be again presented to the President for his assent.

  (6)   Where a Bill is again presented to the President for assent in accordance with the provisions of subsection (5), the President shall assent to the Bill within twenty-one days of its presentation, unless he sooner dissolves Parliament.

  (7)   When a Bill that has been duly passed is assented to in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution it shall become law and the President shall thereupon cause it to be published in the Gazette.

  (8)   No law made by Parliament shall come into operation until it has been published in the Gazette, but Parliament may postpone the coming into operation of any such law and may make laws with retrospective effect.

  36.    Except upon the recommendation of the Minister for the time being responsible for financial matters signified * in writing, the National Assembly shall not 

                   (a)   proceed upon any Bill (including any amendment to a Bill) that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the following purposes 

             (i)   for the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;

             (ii)  for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Fund, or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;

             (iii)  for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of any moneys not charged thereon, or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal; or

             (iv) for the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government;

           (b)   proceed upon any motion (including any amendment to a motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of those purposes; or

           (c)   receive any petition that, in the opinion of the person presiding, requests that provision be made for any of those purposes.

          (b)   as Head of State, address the National Assembly and send messages to the National Assembly to be read to the Assembly by a Minister designated by the President; and

          (c)   as Leader of the Government, address the National Assembly and take part in its proceedings and in the proceedings of any Committee of the Assembly as if he were a member of the Assembly:

        Provided that the President shall not be entitled to vote in the National Assembly or in any Committee thereof.

                37.  The President may at any time  (a) attend the National Assembly;

The

President’s rights in the National Assembly
Oaths to be taken by Speaker, Members and Clerk

Presiding in National Assembly

Quorum in

National

Assembly

Voting in National Assembly

  38.    (1) The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Clerk to the National Assembly before assuming the duties of their respective offices, and every member of the National Assembly before taking his seat therein, shall take and subscribe before the Assembly the oath of allegiance in the form prescribed by law.

  (2)   The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Clerk to the National Assembly shall, in addition to taking and subscribing the oath of allegiance and before assuming the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe such oaths for the due performance of their respective offices as may be prescribed by law.

  (3)   The oaths of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be tendered by and subscribed before the President, and the oaths of all other members of the National Assembly and of the Clerk to the National Assembly shall be tendered by and subscribed before the Speaker or, in his absence, the Deputy Speaker.

  39.    There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly 

    (a) the Speaker;

    (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or

    (c) in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy

  Speaker, such member of the Assembly (not being a

  Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary) as the Assembly

  may elect for that sitting.

  40.    If objection is taken by any member of the National Assembly present that there are present in the Assembly (besides the person presiding) less than one-fourth of all the members of the Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that the number of members present is still less than one-fourth of all the members of the Assembly, he shall thereupon adjourn the Assembly.

  41.    (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any question proposed for decision shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting.                                   
   (2)   The Speaker shall not have an original vote, but, if upon any question before the National Assembly the votes are equally divided, he shall have and exercise a casting vote.

   (3)   Any member of the National Assembly, other than the Speaker, shall, when presiding in the Assembly, retain his original deliberative vote as a member and shall also have and exercise a casting vote where the votes are equally divided.

   (4)   The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may make provision under which a member who votes upon a question in which he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted.

   42.   (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may regulate its own procedure.

   (2) The National Assembly may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership (including any vacancy not filled when the Assembly first meets after any dissolution) and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly shall not invalidate those proceedings.

   43.    The proceedings of the National Assembly shall be conducted in the English language.

Part 3 Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution

  44. (1) Every session of Parliament shall be held at such place within the Republic and shall commence at such time as the President may appoint.

  (2)   There shall be a session of Parliament at least once in every year so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of Parliament in one session and the first sitting thereof in the next session.

  (3)  Whenever Parliament is dissolved a general election of members of the National Assembly shall be held within

Regulation

of

procedure in National Assembly

Official

language

Sessions of Parliament

                       

                                                 
Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament

Sittings of

National

Assembly

60 days of the date of the dissolution and a session of Parliament shall be appointed to commence within 45 days of the date appointed by an order, made by the Electoral Commission under the provisions of an Act of Parliament, as the polling day for that election or, if more than one polling day be appointed, the last polling day.

  (4)   If, after a dissolution and before the holding of a general election of members of the National Assembly, the President is of the opinion that, owing to the existence of a state of war or of a state of emergency in the Republic, it is necessary to recall Parliament, the President shall summon the Parliament that has been dissolved to meet, but, unless the life of Parliament is extended under the provisions of section 45 (6), the general election of members of the National Assembly shall proceed and the Parliament that has been recalled shall, if not sooner dissolved, again stand dissolved on the date appointed for the nomination of candidates in that general election.

  45.    (1) The President may at any time prorogue Parliament.

  (2) The President may at any time dissolve Parliament.

  (3)   If the President dies or resigns his office, Parliament shall forthwith stand dissolved.

  (4)   If the National Assembly passes a resolution that it has no confidence in the Government, the President shall, within three days of the date of the passing of such resolution, dissolve Parliament.

  (5)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (6), Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date of its first sitting after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved.

  (6)   At any time when the Republic is at war. Parliament may from time to time extend the period of five years specified in subsection (5) for not more than twelve months at a time:

  Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.

  46.    (1) The President may, at any time, summon a meeting of the National Assembly.                                                 
         (2)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (1), the sittings of the National Assembly in any session of Parliament after the commencement of that session shall be held at such times and on such days as the Assembly shall appoint.

         (3)   The President, every Minister, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, and every member of the National Assembly shall, except in cases of treason, felony or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest in going to, returning from or while in the precincts of the National Assembly, and shall not, in respect of any utterance in the National Assembly be amenable to any action or proceedings in any Court, tribunal or body other than the National Assembly itself.

         (4)   All official reports and publications of the National Assembly or of its proceedings or of any Committee of the National Assembly shall be privileged and utterances made in the National Assembly or of any Committee thereof wherever published shall be protected by absolute privilege.

                                                 CHAPTER V Executive Power of Malawi

         47.   (1) The executive power and authority of the

       Republic shall vest in the President and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him.

         (2)   Nothing in this section shall prevent Parliament from conferring functions on persons or authorities other than the President.

         48.  (1) The supreme command of the armed forces

       shall vest in the President as Commander-in-Chief.

         (2) The powers conferred on the President by subsection

       (1) shall include 

           (a)   the power to determine the operational use of the armed forces;

Executive authority of Malawi

Command of armed forces                                                  
Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries

                 (6) the power to appoint and remove from office the Army Commander and other members of the armed forces.

               (3)  The President may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as he may think fit, delegate to any member of the armed forces any of the powers conferred upon him by this section.

               (4)  Parliament may regulate the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this section.

               49. (1) There shall be such offices of Minister of the Government as may be established by an Act of Parliament or, subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, by the President.

               (2)   Subject to the provisions of section 50, appointments to the office of Minister shall be made by the President from among the members of the National Assembly.

               (3)   The President may appoint Parliamentary Secretaries from among the members of the National Assembly to assist Ministers in the performance of their duties.

               (4)   The office of a Minister who is a member of the National Assembly, or of a Parliamentary Secretary shall become vacant 

                  (а)  if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament;

                  (б)  if, at the first sitting of the Assembly after any dissolution of Parliament, the holder of the office is not a member of the Assembly, unless he is immediately appointed a Minister under the provisions of section 50;

                  (c) if the President so directs;

                  (d)  upon the assumption by any person of the office of President; or

                  (e)  if the Minister or Parliamentary Secretary dies or resigns from his office.

                         

                                                   
   50. (1) The President may, whenever he considers it desirable or expedient so to do, appoint to the office of Minister such persons, not exceeding at any time three in number, who are not members of the National Assembly whom he considers, by reason of their special qualifications, knowledge or experience, to be fit and proper persons to hold such office.

   (2) The office of any Minister appointed under this section shall become vacant 

     (a) if the President so directs;

     (b)  upon the assumption by any person of the office of President; or

     (c) if the Minister dies or resigns from office.

  51. A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office in such form and manner as may be prescribed by Parliament.

  52. For the purposes of section 49, during any period when Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a member of the National Assembly immediately before that dissolution shall be regarded as continuing as a member of the Assembly.

   53. (1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers consisting of the President and such Ministers as may from time to time be appointed as members of the Cabinet by the President.

   (2)   The Cabinet shall be responsible for advising the President with respect to the policies of the Government and with respect to such other matters as may be referred to it by the President.

   (3)   The Cabinet shall be collectively responsible to Parliament for all things done by or under the authority of any Minister in the execution of his office.

Appointment of Ministers not being members of the National Assembly

Oaths of Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries

Special provisions during a

dissolution of Parliament

Cabinet

                                                                  
Responsibility of Ministers

Secretary

Cabinet

Attorney

General

   (4)   In any case where there is in being a Presidential Commission or Presidential Council, every member of the Presidential Commission or Presidential Council shall be a member of the Cabinet.

   (5) There shall preside at meetings of the Cabinet 

     (a) the President; or

     (b)   in the temporary absence of the President, such Minister as the President may designate; or

     (c)  in any case where the functions of the President are being performed by a Presidential Council, the Secretary-General of the Malawi Congress Party; or

     (d)   in any case where the functions of the President are being performed by a Presidential Commission, the Chairman of the Commission appointed by the President under the provisions of section 15 (1).

   54. The President may, by directions in writing, assign to himself or any Minister responsibility for any business of the Government, including the administration of any department of the Government.

   55. (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet whose office shall be a public office.

   (2) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall have charge of the Cabinet office and shall be responsible, in accordance with such instructions as may be given to him by the President, for arranging the business for, and keeping the minutes of, the Cabinet and for conveying the decisions of the Cabinet to the appropriate persons or authorities and shall have such other functions as the President may direct.

  56. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General, who shall be the principal legal adviser to the Government.

  (2) The Attorney-General shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the President.

                                               
        (3)   The office of Attorney-General may be the office of a Minister or a public office.

         57.      Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of Government, he shall exercise general direction and control over that department and, subject to such direction and control, the department shall be under the supervision of a Permanent Secretary, whose office shall be a public office:

         Provided that two or more Government departments may be placed under the supervision of one Permanent Secretary, and one Government department may be placed under the supervision of two or more Permanent Secretaries.

         58. (1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions, whose office shall be a public office.

         (2)   The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have power in any case in which he considers it desirable so to do 

           (а)   to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court (other than a court-martial) in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by that person;

           (б)   to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings that have been instituted or undertaken by any other person or authority; and

           (c) to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered any such criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by himself or any other person or authority.

         (3)   The powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions under subsection (2) may be exercised by him in person or by officers subordinate to him acting in accordance with his general or special instructions.

         (4)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (6), the powers conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by paragraphs (6) and (c) of subsection (2) shall be vested in him to the exclusion of any other person or authority:

                   Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.

                   (5)   For the purposes of this section, any appeal from any judgment in any criminal proceedings before any court, or any case stated or question of law reserved for the purpose of any such proceedings to any other court, shall be deemed to be part of those proceedings:

                   Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2) (c) shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.

                   (6)   In the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this section, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall at all times be subject to the general or special directions of the Attorney-General:

                   Provided that, where the Attorney-General is not a Minister, the Minister for the time being responsible for the administration of justice may at any time require such case or class of case as he may specify to be submitted to him for the purpose of giving a direction as to whether or not criminal proceedings be instituted or discontinued.

Special provisions relating to persons acting as Attorney-General, Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor-General

                    59.  If the office of 

                      (a) Attorney-General;

                      (b) Director of Public Prosecutions; or

                      (c) Auditor-General,

 is vacant, or if the holder of any of those offices is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person to act as Attorney-General, Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor-General, as the case may be, pending an appointment to any of those offices, or for so long as the officer concerned is unable to exercise the functions of the office.

                        
                            
        60.      The President, in the exercise of the prerogative of mercy, may 

          (а)   grant to any person concerned in or convicted of any offence a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions;

          (б)   grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for any offence;

          (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on any person for any offence; or

          ('d) remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any person for an offence, or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the Government on account of any offence.

        61. (1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the prerogative of mercy which shall consist of such persons as may be appointed by the President.

        (2)   The President may appoint different persons to the Advisory Committee for the purposes of advising him in relation to persons convicted by courts-martial and for the purposes of advising him in relation to persons convicted by other courts.

        (3)   A member of the Advisory Committee shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

       (4)   Where any person has been sentenced to death for any offence, the President shall cause the question of the exercise, in relation to that person, of the powers conferred by section 60, to be considered at a meeting of the Advisory Committee.

        (5)   Subject to the provisions of subsection (4), the President may refer to the Advisory Committee any question as to the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by section 60.

President’s power of pardon, remission etc.

Advisory

Committee


CHAPTER VI
The Judicature Part 1 The High Court

62. (1) There shall be a High Court for the Republic which shall have unlimited original jurisdiction to hear and determine any civil or criminal proceedings under any law and such other jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other law.

(2) The judges of the High Court shall be 

                     (a) the Chief Justice; and

                     (b) such number of Judges, not being less than two, as may be prescribed by Parliament.

(3)   The High Court shall be a superior court of record and, except as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court.

63. (1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the President.

(2)   The Judges shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission.

(3)   (a) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge unless 

	(i)   he is, or has been, a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil or criminal proceedings; or
	(ii)  he is entitled to practise as an advocate or a solicitor in such a court and has been entitled for not less than five years to practise as an advocate or a solicitor in such a court;

	(b)   for the purposes of this subsection, a person shall be regarded as entitled to practise as an advocate or a solicitor if he has been called, enrolled or otherwise admitted as such (and has not subsequently been disbarred or removed from the roll of advocates or solicitors) notwithstanding that                                   
        (i)  he holds or acts in any office the holder of which is, by reason of his office, precluded from practising in a court; or

        (ii)  he does not hold a practising certificate or has not satisfied any other like condition of his being permitted to practise.

     (4)   If the office of Chief Justice is vacant, or if the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office, or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such Justice of Appeal or judge, or such other person qualified for appointment as a judge as the President may appoint:

     Provided that a person who is neither a Justice of Appeal nor a Judge, may be so appointed notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the purposes of sections 64 (1) and 64 (5).

     (5)   If the office of any Judge is vacant or if any Judge is appointed to act as Chief Justice, or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, or if the President is satisfied that the state of business in the High Court requires that the number of judges of the court should be temporarily increased, the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may appoint a person qualified for appointment as a judge to act as a Judge:

     Provided that, for the purposes of this subsection, a person may act as a judge notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the purposes of sections 64 (1) and 64 (5).

     (6)   Any person appointed under subsection (5) to act as a Judge shall, subject to the provisions of sections 64 (3) and 64 (4), continue to act for the period of his appointment or, if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the President after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission:

     Provided that the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a person whose appointment to act as a Judge has expired or been revoked to continue to act as such a judge for such period as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other matter or thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto.

                      64. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the office of a judge shall vacate that office on attaining the prescribed age:

                      Provided that the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a judge who has attained that age to continue in office for such period as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age.

                      (2)   A person holding the office of judge may be removed from office only for incompetence in the performance of the duties of his office or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of subsections (3) and (4).

                      (3)   The President may by an instrument under the Public Seal remove from his office any judge where a motion praying for his removal on the ground of incompetence in the performance of the duties of his office or misbehaviour has been 

                         (a) debated in the National Assembly;

                         (b)   passed by a majority of the votes of all the members of the Assembly; and

                         (c)   submitted to the President as a petition for the removal of the judge concerned.

                      (4)   Where notice of intention to introduce before the National Assembly a motion praying for the removal of a judge from his office has been lodged in the office of the Speaker, the President may, where after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission he is satisfied that it is in the public interest so to do, suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office. Any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, and shall in any case cease to have effect where the motion is withdrawn before being debated in the National Assembly or, upon being debated, is not passed by a majority thereof.

   (5)   The prescribed age for the purposes of subsection (1) shall be the age of sixty-two years or such other age as may be prescribed by Parliament:

   Provided that a law made by Parliament, to the extent that it alters the age at which a judge shall vacate his office, shall not have effect in relation to a judge after his appointment unless he consents to its having effect.

   (6)   The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the provisions of section 63 (6).

   65.     A judge shall not enter upon the duties of his office Oaths to be unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office in such form and manner as may be prescribed by law.

    66.    Save where the context otherwise requires, any Acting references in this Constitution to the Chief Justice, a Justice of Appeal, or a Judge shall be construed as including a reference to any person who, under the provisions of this Constitution, is for the time being performing the duties of the Chief Justice, a Justice of Appeal or a Judge respectively.

            Part 2 The Supreme Court of Appeal

   67. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Appeal for Supreme Malawi which, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, shall have such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or by any other law.

   (2)   The Justices of the Supreme Court of Appeal shall be 

				(a) the Chief Justice, an President;  


                        (b)   such number of Justices of Appeal (if any) as may be prescribed by Parliament; and

                        (c)   the other Judges of the High Court for the time being holding office.

(3)   The Supreme Court of Appeal shall be a superior court of record and, except as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court.

(4)   When the Supreme Court of Appeal is determining any matter, other than an interlocutory matter, it shall be composed of an uneven number of Justices, not being less than three.

(5)   The provisions of sections 63 (2), 63 (3), 63 (.5), 63 (6), 64 and 65 shall apply in relation to a Justice of Appeal as they apply in relation to a judge.

Part 3 Appeals

                     68.     Subject to the provisions of section 32 (2), an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court to the Supreme Court of Appeal as of right in the following cases 

                        (a)   where the matter in dispute on the appeal to the Supreme Court of Appeal is of the value of £500 or upwards or where the appeal involves directly or indirectly a claim to or question respecting property or a right of the value of £500 or upwards, or final decisions in any. civil or criminal proceedings;

                        (b)  final decisions in proceedings for dissolution or nullity of marriage;

                        (c)  final decisions in any proceedings on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution; and

                        (d)  in such other cases as may be prescribed by Parliament.

  69.    An appeal shall lie as of right to the High Court from final decisions given by any subordinate court in any case in which, if the decision of the subordinate court were a decision of the High Court, an appeal would he as of right to the Supreme Court of Appeal under section 68 :

   Provided that an appeal shah not he direct to the High Court from a decision given by a subordinate court in any such case if, under any law, an appeal lies as of right from that decision to another subordinate court.

   70. (1) The High Court shah have jurisdiction to supervise any civil or criminal proceedings before any court to which this section applies and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purposes of ensuring that justice is duly administered by any such court.

   (2)   The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to the jurisdiction and powers conferred on it by subsection (1).

   (3)   This section applies to every subordinate court (other than a Local Court) and to such Local Courts and such courts-martial as may be prescribed by Parliament.

Part 4 Judicial Service Commission

  71. There shall be a Judicial Service Commission which shall consist of 

    (a) the Chief Justice, who shall be Chairman;

    (b)  the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or such other member of that Commission as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Chairman of that Commission; and

    (c)  such Justice of Appeal or judge as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the President acting after consultation with the Chief Justice.

  72. (1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices to which this section applies (including power to confirm appointments), and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the President.
                   (2)   The President may, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, delegate any of his powers under this section by direction in writing to the Judicial Service Commission or any member thereof, or any judge or any person holding or acting in any office to which this section applies.

                   (3)   The Judicial Service Commission shall advise the President in relation to the appointment of persons to hold or act in any office to which this section applies, the confirmation of such appointments or the removal of any such persons from office, but the President shall not be bound by any such advice.

                      (4)   The Judicial Service Commission shall, subject to the general or special directions of the President, given from time to time, exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any office to which this section applies.

                         (5) The offices to which this section applies are 

                      (a) the office of Registrar or Deputy Registrar of the Supreme Court of Appeal or of the High Court;

                      (b) the office of Resident Magistrate or Magistrate; and

                      (c)   such other offices of or member of any court of law, as may be prescribed by Parliament.

CHAPTER VII Finance

  73. No tax, rate, duty, levy or imposition shall be raised, levied or imposed by or for the purposes of the Government or any local authority otherwise than by or under the authority of law.

        Consolidated 74. All revenues or other moneys raised or received for Fund the purposes of the Government shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, be paid into and form one fund, to be known as the Consolidated Fund.

Taxation to be imposed only under law       
      75. (1) Subject to subsection (6) no moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except 

        (a) to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament; or

        (b) where the issue of those moneys has been authorized by an Appropriation Act, a supplementary Appropriation Act or by an Act made in pursuance of subsection (5) or of sections 80, 81, 82, 83 or 84, or by a resolution of the National Assembly made in accordance with the provisions of section 79.

      (2)   Where any moneys are charged by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament upon the Consolidated Fund, they shall be paid out of that fund by the Minister responsible for finance to the person or authority to whom payment is due.

      (3)   No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except in the manner prescribed by Parliament.

      (4)   The investment of moneys forming part of the Consolidated Fund by way of deposit with a bank or with the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations or by way of purchase of trustee securities as defined by an Act of Parliament shall not be regarded as a withdrawal of those moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes of this Constitution.

     (5)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament authorizing withdrawals to be made from the Consolidated Fund, in such circumstances and to such extent as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, for the purpose of making advances to persons or authorities other than the Government:

     Provided that no moneys shall be advanced from the Consolidated Fund under this subsection save on condition that they are repayable by the person or authority to whom or on behalf of whom they are advanced.

Withdrawals

from

Consolidated

Fund
                            
                    (6)   Subsection (1) does not apply to any such sums as are mentioned in subsection (3) of section 77

 76. (1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated

        Consolidated Fund, in addition to any grant, remuneration or other Fimd moneys so charged by this Constitution or any other law 

                      (a) all debt charges for which the Government is liable;

                      (b)   all pensions, compensation for loss of office and gratuities for which the Government is liable;

                      (c)   any moneys required to satisfy any judgment, decision or award made or given against the Government by any court or tribunal; and

                      (d)   all moneys or debt charges charged before the appointed day upon the revenues or public funds of Malawi.

                    (2)   For the purposes of this section, “ debt charges ” include interest, sinking fund charges, the repayment or amortization of debt, and all expenditure in connexion with the raising of loans on the security of the Consolidated Fund and the service and redemption of debt thereby created.

Annual

financial

statements

                      77. (1) The Minister for the time being responsible for finance shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before the National Assembly before the commencement of that financial year a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government in respect of that financial year, other than the sums specified in subsection (3):

                 Provided that where the National Assembly does not propose to debate the estimates until after the commencement of the financial year to which they relate, the estimates of revenue may be laid before the National Assembly at any time before the commencement of such debate.

                    (2) The estimates of expenditure shall show separately 

                      (a) the total sums required to meet expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund;

        

                                                  
       (6)   the sums respectively required to meet the heads of other expenditure proposed to be met from the Consolidated Fund.

     (3) The sums to be shown in the estimates of receipts and expenditure shall not include 

       (а)   sums representing the proceeds of any loan raised by the Government for specific purposes and appropriated for those purposes by the Act authorizing the raising of the loan;

       (б)   sums representing any money or interest on money received by the Government subject to a trust and to be held or applied in accordance with the terms of that trust;

       (c)   sums representing moneys authorised to be advanced from the Consolidated Fund under the provisions of an Act of Parliament and repayments thereof;

       (d)   sums representing moneys received for or to be applied from any special fund established and regulated by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament which provides that the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to that fund.

     78.    When the estimates of expenditure to be met from the Consolidated Fund but not charged thereon have been approved by the National Assembly a Bill, to be known as an Appropriation Bill, shall be introduced in the Assembly providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums, under separate votes for the several heads of expenditure approved, to the purposes specified in the Bill.

     79. (1) If in respect of any financial year it is found 

       (а)   that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act for any purpose is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act; or

       (б)   that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount (if any) appropriated for that purpose by the Appropriation Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National Assembly and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a supplementary Appropriation Bill or in a motion or motions approving such expenditure.

                       (2) Where any supplementary expenditure has been approved in a financial year by a resolution of the National Assembly under the provisions of subsection (1), a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced in the National Assembly as soon as practicable after the commencement of the financial year next following, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved.

80. Parliament may make provision under which, if it appears to the Minister for the time being responsible for in advance of finance that the Appropriation Act in respect of any  financial year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, he may authorize the withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of moneys for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier:

                       Provided that provision for any moneys so withdrawn shall be included, under the appropriate heads, in the Appropriation Bill.

 81. (1)       Parliament may make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for authorizing the Minister for the time being responsible for finance, if he is satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need.

                      (2) Where any advance is made from the Contingencies Fund, a supplementary estimate shall, as soon as practicable, be presented to and voted on by the National Assembly and a supplementary Appropriation Bill or motion approving such expenditure in accordance with section 79 shall be introduced for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced.

             82. (1) A loan may be raised by the Government under the authority of an Act of Parliament and not otherwise.

    (2) Parliament may, in the Act authorizing the raising of a loan or by any other Act, appropriate the proceeds of the loan for specific purposes and authorize the payment of such proceeds out of the Consolidated Fund for such purposes.

    83. (1) An Act of Parliament may, subject to section 84, make provision for the creation of special funds which shall be accounted within the accounts of the Consolidated Fund and for the regulation or management of the moneys accounted in such special funds. Such Act may provide that the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of section 77 shall not apply to any particular special fund.

    (2) Parliament may make provision regulating the manner in which moneys or investments held by Government subject to a trust are to be accounted for.

    84. (1) There shall be a special fund within the Consolidated Fund to be known as the Development Fund. Receipts and expenditure of the Government relating to the development of the Republic, which have not been included in the annual statement provided for in section 77, shall be accounted in the accounts of the Development Fund. Estimates of such receipts and expenditure shall be submitted by the Minister for the time being responsible for finance to the National Assembly not less than once yearly.

    (2) When the estimates of expenditure to be met from the Development Fund have been approved by the National Assembly, a Bill to be known as an Appropriation (Development Fund) Bill shall be introduced in the National Assembly providing for the issue from the Development Fund and appropriation of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure.

    85. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General who shall be appointed by the President and whose office shall be a public office.

Raising of loans by Government

 Special funds and trust moneys

Development Fund

The Auditor-General and his functions
Publio

Service

Commission

                      (2)   The public accounts of Malawi shall be audited and reported on by the Auditor-General.

                     (3)   The Auditor-General shall perform such other duties and exercise such other powers in relation to the public accounts and to the accounts of other public authorities and bodies, as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

                     (4)   The Auditor-General shall submit his reports at least once a year to the Minister for the time being responsible for finance, who shall cause every such report to be laid before the National Assembly not later than the first meeting of the Assembly after he has received the report.

                     (5)   In the exercise of the functions vested in him by this Constitution, and subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Auditor-General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

                                CHAPTER VIII

                              The Public Service

                 86. (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than three nor more than five other members.

                   (2) The members of the Public Service Commission shall be appointed by the President.

                    (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Public Service Commission if he is a Minister, a member of the National Assembly or a public officer.

                         

                                                  
      (4)  Subject to the provisions of this section, the office of a member of the Public Service Commission shall become vacant 

        (а)  at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; or

        (б)  if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such.

      (5)  A member of the Public Service Commission may be removed from office by the President.

      (6)  If the office of Chairman of the Public Service Commission is vacant or if the person holding that office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as may be designated in that behalf by the President.

      (7)  If at any time there are less than three members of the Public Service Commission besides the Chairman or if any such member is appointed to act as Chairman or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment as a member of the Commission to act as a member, and any person so appointed shall, subject to the provisions of subsection (4), continue to act until the office in which he is acting is filled or, as the case may be, until the holder thereof resumes his functions or until his appointment to act is revoked by the President.

      87. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, power to appoint persons to hold or act in any offices in the public service (including power to confirm appointments), office™ and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the President.

      (2) The President may, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, delegate any of his powers under this section by directions in writing to the Public Service Commission, or any member thereof or to any public officer.
                    (3)   The Public Service Commission may be required by the President to advise him in relation to the appointment of persons to hold or act in any office in the public service to which this section applies, the confirmation of such appointments or the removal of any such person from office.

                    (4)   The Public Service Commission shall, subject to the general or special directions of the President given from time to time and to any regulations made by the Minister under the provisions of section 95, exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any office to which this section applies.

                    (5)   The Public Service Commission may, subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, delegate any of its powers under this section (including any powers delegated to it by the President, unless the President shall have otherwise directed) by directions in writing to any member of the Commission or to any public officer.

                    (6)   The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any of the following offices 

                       (a) the office of any Justice of Appeal or of any judge;

                       (b)   the offices of Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor-General;

                       (c)  any office to which section 56 (which relates to the office of the Attorney General), section 72 (which relates to judicial offices), section 89 (which relates to the offices of representatives of the Republic abroad) or section 90 (which relates to the offices of Permanent Secretaries and the office of the Secretary to the Cabinet) applies;

                       (d) any appointment in the armed forces; or

                       (e) any office in the Malawi Police Force.

                    (7)   In any case where the President has delegated to the Public Service Commission the power of appointment of the Clerk or the Clerk-Assistant to the National Assembly, then before exercising any of its powers in relation to the Clerk or Clerk-Assistant of the National Assembly, the Public Service Commission shall consult the Speaker of the Assembly.
                                                 
  88. (1) Power to appoint persons to hold or to act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions and to remove from office a person holding or acting in such office shall vest solely in the President.

   (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment to hold or to act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions unless he is qualified to be appointed as a judge.

   89. Power to appoint persons to hold or to act in the offices of Ambassador, High Commissioner or other principal diplomatic representative of the Republic, and to remove from office persons holding or acting in such offices, shall vest solely in the President.

   90. Power to appoint persons to hold or to act in the offices of Permanent Secretary or the Secretary to the Cabinet, and to remove from office persons holding or acting in such offences, shall vest solely in the President.

  91.    There shall be a Police Service Commission, which shall consist of 

    (a)   the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, who shall be Chairman of the Commission;

    (b) a judge designated by the President; and

    (c)  a member of the Public Service Commission, other than the Chairman, designated by the President.

  92.    Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the office of Commissioner of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police shall vest solely in the President.

  93. Subject to the provisions of section 92, the provisions of subsections (1) to (5) inclusive of section 87 (which relates to the appointment of public officers) shall apply in relation to the appointment of police officers with the following modifications 

Appointment of Director of Public Prosecutions

Principal representatives of the Republic abroad

Appointment of Permanent Secretaries etc.

Police

Service

Commission

 Appointment of Commissioner and Deputy-Commissioner of Police Appointment eto. of police officers

                       

                                                 
Laws with respect to police discipline

Regulations for the

public

service

           (а)   for the expression “ offices in the public service ” there shall be substituted the expression “ offices in the Malawi Police Force ”;

           (б)   for the expression “ the Public Service Commission” there shall be substituted the expression “ the Police Service Commission ”; and

           (c) for the expression “ public officer ” there shall be substituted the expression “ police officer

          94.     Parliament may make provision constituting acts or omissions by members of the Malawi Police Force as offences against police force discipline, and prescribing the punishment that may be imposed for any such offence. The powers of the Police Service Commission and of any officer of the Malawi Police Force by or under section 93, with respect to disciplinary control and removal from office of members of the Police Force, shall be exercised in accordance with any such provision and with any regulations made by the Minister under the provisions of section

          95. (1) The Minister for the time being responsible for the public service may, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, make regulations for the administration, regulation and disciplinary control of the public service and for matters incidental thereto.

          (2) Without derogation from the generality of the provisions of subsection (1), any such regulations may make provision for 

            (а)   the terms and conditions of service of public officers; and

            (б)   the performance of the functions of any appropriate Service Commission and the forms and procedures to be followed by those Commissions in the exercise of their functions, or by any persons to whom those functions may have lawfully been delegated.

                                                 
                     CHAPTER IX Miscellaneous

  96.     (1) Any person who is appointed or elected to any office established by or under this Constitution may resign from that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed or elected:

  Provided that in the case of a person who holds the office of President, Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly his resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Assembly, and in the case of a member of the Assembly his resignation shall be addressed to the Speaker.

  97.     (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, Parliament may amend this Constitution.

  (2) A Bill introduced into the National Assembly under this section shall not be passed unless 

     (а)   the Bill is in its title expressed to be an Act to amend the Constitution; and

     (б)   the Bill is supported on the second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the National Assembly.

  98.     (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires 

     “ Act of Parliament ” means any law made by Parliament, either before or after the appointed day, and includes any existing law continued in force by section 5 of the Republic of Malawi (Constitution) Act, 1966;

     “ appointed day ” means the 6th day of July, 1966;

     “appropriate Service Commission” means, as the context or circumstances of the case may require, the Public Service Commission, the Judicial Service Commission or the Police Service Commission, provided for in this Constitution;

     “ armed forces ” means the armed forces of the Republic;

          “ Committee of Appointment ” means the Committee of Appointment referred to in section 14;

          “ Consolidated Fund ” means the Consolidated Fund established by section 74;

          “ Contingencies Fund ” means the Contingencies Fund referred to in section 81;

          “ Electoral College ” means the Electoral College established by section 11;

          “ Electoral Commission ” means the Electoral Commission established by section 30;

          “ the Government ” means the authority, for the time being, in which is vested the executive power of the Republic;

          “ judge ” means a judge of the High Court and includes the Chief Justice;

          “ Local Court ” means a court established by or under the Local Courts Ordinance;

          “ Minister ” means a Minister of the Government appointed by the President under the provisions of sections 49 or 50 and includes the President when he is himself exercising the functions of a Minister under the provisions of this Constitution;

          “ the National Assembly ” means the National Assembly constituted under the provisions of section 19, and the expression “ the Assembly ” shall be construed accordingly;

          “ the Party ” means the Malawi Congress Party;

          “ pensions benefits ” means any pensions, compensations, gratuities or other like allowances conferred on persons in respect of their service as public officers, or provided for the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service;

          “ Presidential Commission ” means a Presidential Commission appointed under the provisions of section 15;

           “ Presidential Council ” means a Presidential Council constituted under the provisions of section 13;

           “ public office ” means an office of emolument in the public service;

           “ public officer ” means a person holding or acting in any public office;

           “ public service ” means, subject to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3), the service of the Government in a civil capacity;

           “ Republic ” means the Republic of Malawi;

           “ Secretary-General ” means the Secretary-General of the Party;

           “ session ” means the sittings of the National Assembly beginning when it first sits after the appointed day, or after its prorogation or dissolution at any time, and ending when it is prorogued, or is dissolved without having been prorogued;

           “ sitting ” means a period during which the National Assembly is sitting without adjournment, and includes any period during which it is in committee;

           “ subordinate court ” means any court established for the Republic other than 

             (а) the Supreme Court of Appeal;

             (б) the High Court; or (c) a court-martial;

           “ terminal benefits ” means any benefits, allowances or privileges conferred on any public officer by the Government on the termination of his service or employment.

        (2) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, references to offices in the public service shall be construed as including references to the office of Justices of Appeal and Judges and to the office of Magistrate, and to the offices of members of the Malawi Police Force, being offices the emoluments attaching to which are paid directly out of moneys provided by Parliament.
             (3)   In this Constitution, reference to an office in the public service shall not be construed as including references to the office of the President, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, any Minister or Parliamentary Secretary, a member of the Assembly, a member of any Commission established by this Constitution or a Chief or sub-Chief.

             (4)   For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered as holding a public office by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service under the Government.

    Passed in Parliament this twentieth day of May, one thousand, nine hundred and sixty-six.

                                                      C. K. M. Mfune Clerk of Parliament

      