<pre>
 Togo
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of
 TOGO'
 May 5, 1963
 PREAMBLE
 The Togolese people, independent and sovereign, places itself under the
 protection of. God and solemnly proclaims its attachment to the principles
 of democracy and the rights of man as they are defined in the Universal
 Declaration of December 10, 1948.
 Desirous of instituting a political regime which will exclude all ideas
 of. personal power, it proclaims its intention to safeguard respect and
 guarantees for
 - political liberties,
 - trade union liberties,
 - the rights and liberties of the human person, the family and local
 communities,
 - philosophic and religious liberties,
 - individual and collective property rights,
 - economic and social rights.
 The Togolese people,
 Conscious of the intimate solidarity which binds it to the other peoples
 of Africa and desirous of preparing the way for African unity,
 Decides that it will spare no effort to attain this end.
 It affirms, moreover, its desire to co-operate in peace and friendship
 with all peoples who share its ideal of justice, liberty, equality, fraternity
 and human solidarity.
 TITLE I
 THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. Togo, an independent and sovereign state, is a republic.
 The Togolese Republic is indivisible, secular, democratic and social.
 1 Constitution de la Republique Togolaise, 5 mai 1963. Imprimerie Editogo, Lom6.
 Supplied by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Translated by the Editor.
 
 80
 
 
 It shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the law, without
 distinction or origin, race, sex or religion.
 It shall respect all beliefs.
 The motto of the Togolese Republic is "Work, Liberty, Country."
 Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the
 people.
 The flag of the Republic is composed of five horizontal stripes alter-
 nately green and yellow. In the upper left hand corner there is a white
 star on a red ground.
 The official language of the Republic is French.
 The national anthem is "Terre de nos Aieux."
 The State seal and the coat of arms of the Republic are as defined in law
 no. 62-10 of March 14, 1962.
 Art. 2. National sovereignty belongs to the Togolese people who shall
 exercise it through its representatives.
 No section of the people nor any individual may usurp the exercise
 of this right.
 Suffrage may be direct or indirect. It shall always be universal, equal
 and secret.
 All Togolese citizens of both sexes who have reached their majority
 and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the conditions
 to be determined by law.
 Art. 3. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the ex-
 pression of the suffrage. They shall be formed and shall exercise their
 activities freely within the framework of the laws and regulations. They
 must respect the principles of national sovereignty and democracy.
 Art. 4. Any act of racial, ethnic or religious discrimination, as well
 as any regionalist propaganda which might threaten the internal security
 of the State, national unity or the integrity of the territory, shall be
 punished by law.
 TITLE II
 PUBLIC LIBERTIES AND THE HUMAN PERSON
 Art. 5. The human person is sacred. The State is obliged to respect
 and protect it.
 Art. 6. All Togolese are equal before the law without distinction of sex,
 family, race, language, beliefs or opinions.
 Art. 7. The Togolese Republic recognizes and guarantees the inalienable
 and imprescriptible rights of man, both in respect of the individual and
 of the social formations where he exercises his personality.
 Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality
 saving respect for the rights of others and the public order.
 
 891
 
 Togo
 
 
 The freedom of the human person is inviolable. Noone may be arrested
 and detained except by order of the competent authority except in cases
 of flagrant and serious violation of an existing law.
 Noone may be arrested nor found guilty except under a law in force
 before the act was committed. In all the states and at every stage of
 procedure, there shall exist the absolute right to a defense.
 Art. 8. The domicile is inviolable.
 Searches may be ordered only by a judge or other authorities appointed
 by law. Searches must be carried out at the times and according to the
 forms prescribed by law. Measures which threaten or diminish the invio-
 lability of domicile may only be taken in order to meet a collective danger
 or to protect persons in danger of death. Such measures may also be taken
 in application of laws to protect the public order, fight the risk of an
 epidemic or protect youth in danger.
 Art. 9. The secrecy of correspondence and of postal, telephonic and
 telegraphic communications is inviolable. This inviolability may be
 restricted only by law.
 Art. 10. All citizens of the Republic have the right to move and settle
 freely over the whole territory of the Togolese Republic. This right may
 be limited only by law. Noone may be submitted to security measures
 except in the cases provided by law.
 Art. 11. The right of property is guaranteed by the Constitution. It
 may be restricted only in cases of public utility, determined according to
 legal forms and subject to a fair and prior indemnity.
 Art. 12. Everyone has the right freely to express and make known his
 opinions by speech, pen and image, subject to respect for the laws and
 regulations.
 Art. 13. Freedom of association is guaranteed to all under the con-
 ditions stipulated by law.
 Assemblies and groups whose purposes or activities would be illegal
 or contrary to the public order shall be prohibited.
 Art. 14. Marriage and the family form the natural basis of society.
 They are placed under the protection of the State.
 The nation shall ensure to the individual and to the family the con-
 ditions necessary to their development.
 Art. 15. Parents have the natural right and duty to raise their children.
 They shall be supported in this task by the State and by public bodies.
 Protection of youth against exploitation and moral intellectual or physical
 abandonment is binding upon the State and public bodies.
 Art. 16. Every child has the right to instruction and education.
 The State and the public bodies shall create the prior conditions and
 the public institutions which will guarantee the education of children.
 Public schools and religious and private schools shall be provided for
 the education of youth. Religious institutions and communities shall also
 be recognized as sources of education.
 
 892
 
 Togo
 
 
 Religious and private schools may be opened with the authorization
 and under the control of the State.
 Art. 17. Freedom of conscience and the free profession and practise of
 religion are guaranteed to all, subject to the public order. Religious
 institutions and communities have the right to develop without hindrance
 subject to respect for existing laws and regulations.
 Art. 18. Work is a right and duty for all. Noone may be injured in his
 work because of his origins, beliefs or opinions.
 Whoever works has the right to equitable remuneration which will
 ensure to him and his family an existence that accords with human
 dignity.
 The right of workers to strike is recognized; it shall be exercised within
 the framework of the laws relating thereto. It may not under any circum-
 stances threaten the liberty to work.
 Workers may belong to a union and defend their rights by union
 activity.
 All workers shall participate through their delegates in the determination
 of the conditions of work.
 Special laws shall fix the conditions of assistance and protection which
 society shall provide for the workers.
 Art. 19. Citizens have duties from which noone may absolve himself.
 These duties arise essentially out of national solidarity and respect for the
 laws.
 The defense of the country and of the integrity of the territory of the
 Republic is the duty of each citizen.
 Payment of taxes and contribution to public expenditure is the duty of
 all.
 TITLE III
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC,
 THE VICE-PRESIDENT AND THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 20. The President of the Republic is the Head of State.
 He shall embody the national unity and ensure the continuance of the
 State.
 As guardian of the Constitution, he shall be the guarantor of national
 independence, of the integrity of the territory, of respect for treaties and
 international agreements.
 As holder, together with the members of the government, of the execu-
 tive power, he shall determine and conduct the policy of the nation.
 He shall represent the State on all public occasions.
 Art. 21. The President of the Republic shall be assisted by a Vice-
 President of the Republic.
 
 Togo
 
 893
 
 
 The Vice-President of the Republic shall exercise the powers which
 devolve upon him, temporarily or permanently by delegation of the
 Head of State. He shall also receive a ministerial post.
 Art. 22. The President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be
 elected for five years by universal direct suffrage. They shall be eligible
 once for reelection to either of these offices.
 The elections shall be called by decree taken in the Council of Ministers.
 They shall take place on the same day as that fixed for the general
 elections.
 Elections shall take place at least twenty days and at most fifty days
 before the expiration of the term of the President and Vice-President
 of the Republic and of the legislature in office.
 An organic law shall fix the method of voting, conditions of eligibility,
 presentation of candidacies, voting procedure, counting and proclamation
 of the results.
 Art. 23. The President of the Republic shall be inaugurated by the
 Supreme Court in accordance with the manner and ceremonial to be laid
 down in an organic law.
 Before his entry into office, he shall take the following oath:
 "I solemnly swear before God and the Togolese people who alone hold
 the national sovereignty, to respect the Constitution, to fulfil honorably,
 disinterestedly and loyally the high office entrusted to me, and to con-
 secrate all my forces without respite to the defense and safeguarding of
 the high interests of the Nation."
 Art. 24. In the event that the Presidency of the Republic has been
 vacated or impeded in its functioning, the Vice-President shall exercise
 the functions of Head of State with the exception of those provided in
 Article 34 and 35. In case of definitive impediment, death or resignation
 of the President, the Vice-President shall exercise the functions of Head
 of State as described and limited above, until the election of a new
 President of the Republic. This election shall take place at least twenty
 and at most forty days after the President has terminated his functions.
 Cases of definitive impediment shall be submitted for final attestation
 by the Supreme Court.
 The President of the Republic shall address his resignation to the
 President of the Supreme Court, who shall notify the President of the
 National Assembly thereof.
 The term of the new President shall expire on the date when that of
 the former President would have expired.
 If the definitive impediment in the presidency occurs in the last year
 of the presidential term there shall be no election for a new President.
 The Vice-President shall then become Head of State. He shall be invested
 with all the powers of that office and shall take the oath in the forms and
 under the conditions prescribed by law.
 
 894
 
 Togo
 
 
 Art. 25. The President of the Republic shall be the head of the Govern-
 ment. He shall chose and appoint the members of the Government,
 determine their powers and preside over the Council of Ministers. He
 shall cause records of the meetings of the Council to be kept.
 The members of the Government shall be responsible to the President
 of the Republic who may terminate their functions.
 Ministers may not be prosecuted nor brought before the courts in cases
 of common law crimes or misdemeanors committed outside the sphere
 of their functions without the written authorization of the President of
 the Republic given in the Council of Ministers.
 Art. 26. The President of the Republic shall hold the regulatory power.
 He shall exercise it by decrees taken in the Council of Ministers.
 Art. 27. The President of the Republic shall be the head of the adminis-
 tration and of the armed forces. He shall make all civil and military
 appointments of the state except those in respect of which another au-
 thority has been given the power of appointment.
 Art. 28. The President of the Republic shall be responsible for national
 defence. He shall control the armed forces.
 Art. 29. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors
 and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers. Ambassadors and Envoys
 Extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him.
 Art. 30. The President of the Republic together with the members
 of the National Assembly, shall have the right to initiate legislation. He
 shall ensure promulgation of laws within fifteen days following their
 transmission to him by the President of the National Assembly.
 Before the expiration of this time limit, he may ask the National
 Assembly for a second reading of the law for some of its articles. The
 second reading may not be refused. Voting upon the second reading shall
 be by a majority of the members of the National Assembly.
 The President of the Republic may also ask the Supreme Court to rule
 on the constitutionality of a text passed by the Assembly.
 Art. 31. The President of the Republic may, after official consultation
 with and advice from the Presidents of the National Assembly and of the
 Supreme Court, submit to referendum any text which seems to him to
 require direct consultation with the people.
 When a bill is adopted by a referendum the President of the Republic
 shall promulgate it within the time limit provided in the preceding article.
 Art. 32. The President of the Republic shall ensure the execution of
 the laws. He shall issue the regulations which are applicable to the
 whole territory of the Republic.
 Art. 33. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the
 National Assembly either directly or by messages read by the President
 of the National Assembly. If the National Assembly is not in session it
 shall be specially convened for this purpose.
 
 Togo
 
 895
 
 
 Art. 34. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of
 the nation, the integrity of its territory or the execution of its inter-
 national undertakings are threatened by a grave and present danger,
 the President of the Republic shall take the exceptional measures required
 by the circumstances after consultation with and advice from the Presi-
 dents of the National Assembly and the Supreme Court. He shall inform
 the nation by a message.
 The National Assembly shall meet automatically to be informed of the
 measures taken and to consider those that should be taken. The duration
 of the measure taken by the President of the Republic shall be limited
 to the circumstances which give rise to them.
 Art. 35. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.
 Art. 36. The President of the Republic may address messages to the
 nation.
 Art. 37. The functions of the President of the Republic of the Vice
 President shall be incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary
 mandate, any public employment and any professional activity.
 TITLE IV
 PARLIAMENT
 Art. 38. Parliament shall be composed of a single assembly entitled
 the National Assembly. Its members shall bear the title of deputy to the
 National Assembly.
 Art. 39. The National Assembly shall hold the legislative power.
 It alone shall pass the laws.
 Art. 40. Deputies to the National Assembly shall be elected by universal
 direct suffrage for five years at the same time as the President and the
 Vice President of the Republic.
 An organic law shall fix the number of members of the National As-
 sembly, their remuneration, the conditions of their election, the rules
 of eligibility and ineligibility, the offices incompatible with membership
 and the method of voting.
 A deputy who has been appointed Minister shall not receive his par-
 liamenty emolument during his term of ministerial office.
 A law shall also stipulate the conditions for elections to seats which
 have become vacant, pending the next general renewal of the Assembly.
 Art. 41. No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, detained or tried as a
 result of the opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of his
 functions.
 No deputy may, during Parliamentary sessions, be prosecuted or
 arrested for criminal or minor offenses without the authorization of the
 National Assembly except in flagrante delicto.
 
 896
 
 Togo
 
 
 When the Assembly is not in session, no deputy may be arrested without
 the authorization of the Secretariat of the National Assembly except in
 flagrante delicto, cases of authorized prosecution or of final conviction.
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 Assembly so requests.
 Art. 42. Binding instructions on deputies shall be forbidden. The
 right to vote of deputies shall be personal. An organic law may, in ex-
 ceptional circumstances, authorize the delegation of a vote but no one
 may be delegated more than one vote.
 Art. 43. The National Assembly shall meet by right in ordinary session
 on the first Tuesday of May and the first Tuesday of October. The duration
 of these sessions may not exceed two months.
 Art. 44. The National Assembly may be convened in extraordinary
 session to consider a limited agenda, either
 - on the initiative of the President of the Republic, or
 - if an absolute majority of its members address a written request to
 its President.
 The duration of each extraordinary session may not exceed fifteen days.
 The convening decree shall contain the agenda to be considered by the
 National Assembly. As soon as the agenda has been exhausted, the closure
 decree shall be pronounced.
 Art. 45. Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public.
 The account of the debates and parliamentary documents shall be
 published in the Journal Officiel.
 The Assembly may sit in secret committee at the request of the President
 of the Republic or one third of its deputies.
 Art. 46. The President of the Assembly shall be elected for the duration
 of the legislature. As an exception, however, in case of necessity voted by
 a two thirds majority of the Assembly, a new President may be elected.
 Art. 47. The National Assembly shall draw up its rules of procedure
 which shall regulate the functioning of the National Assembly within the
 framework of this Constitution.
 Art. 48. The Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court shall
 assure any claimant of the validity of the legislative elections.
 It shall also rule as to conformity with the Constitution of the rules of
 procedure of the National Assembly.
 TITLE V
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
 AND PARLIAMENT
 Art. 49. The President of the Republic and the deputies to the National
 Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 
 Togo
 
 897
 
 
 Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for the
 exercise of their public liberties; the obligations imposed by the national
 defense upon the persons and property of citizens;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts,
 inheritance and gifts;
 - the procedure whereby customs shall be determined and harmonized
 with the fundamental principles of the Constitution;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 applicable thereto, criminal procedure, amnesty, the creation of new
 juridical systems, and the status of magistrates;
 - the basis, rate and method of collecting taxes of all sorts, the issuance
 of currency.
 Laws shall also establish the regulations concerning:
 - the electoral system for the local assemblies;
 - the establishment of categories of public institutions;
 - the fundamental guarantees granted to civil and military personnel
 employed by the State;
 - the nationalization of enterprises and the transfer of property from
 the public to the private sector.
 Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of:
 - the general organization of national defense;
 - the free administration of local communities, the extent of their
 jurisdiction and their resources;
 - education;
 - property rights, civil and commercial obligations;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security;
 - the system of remuneration for agents of the State.
 The finance laws shall determine the resources and obligations of the
 State under the conditions and with the reservations to be provided by an
 organic law. Government posts may be established or changed only by
 the finance laws.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives
 of the economic and social action of the State. The Plan shall be approved
 by law.
 The provisions of this article may be developed in detail and amplified
 by an organic law.
 The President of the Republic, moreover, may, for reasons of social,
 economic or financial importance, submit to a vote by the National
 Assembly any bills relating to matters other than those enumerated in this
 article without thereby incurring a derogation from the provisions of the
 second paragraph of Article 54.
 Art. 50. The National Assembly shall pass the finance bill under the
 conditions to be stipulated by an organic law.
 
 898
 
 Togo
 
 
 If the National Assembly has not acted, within a time limit of fifty
 days after the bill has been filed, its provisions may be put into effect by
 ordinance, taking into account any amendment adopted by the National
 Assembly and accepted by the Government. If the Finance bill which
 draws up the resources and expenditures for a financial year has not been
 filed in time to be promulgated before the beginning of that year, the
 Government shall ask Parliament for emergency authority to collect the
 taxes, and shall, by decree, open the credits relating to the chapters of
 the bill which have been passed.
 The time limit provided in this article shall be suspended when the
 National Assembly is not in session.
 The Supreme Court shall assist the Government and the National
 Assembly in controlling the implementation of the finance laws.
 Art. 51. Only the National Assembly may authorize the declaration
 of war.
 Art. 52. The President of the Republic and the Council of Ministers,
 shall decree both a national emergency and martial law.
 The National Assembly shall meet automatically if it is not in session.
 Only the National Assembly may authorize prorogation of martial law
 beyond fifteen days.
 Art. 53. Laws shall be transmitted, after their adoption by the National
 Assembly, without delay to the President of the Republic who shall
 promulgate them in accordance with the conditions stipulated in Article 80
 above.
 Art. 54. Matters other than those falling within the domain of law
 according to this Constitution shall be of a regulatory character.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters may be modified by decree
 if the Supreme Court declares them to be of a regulatory character,
 as defined in the above paragraph.
 Art. 55. The President of the Republic may ask the National Assembly,
 for a limited period and specific purposes, to authorize him to take by
 ordinance measures which normally fall within the domain of law. Such
 ordinances shall subsequently be submitted to ratification by the National
 Assembly.
 Such ordinances shall be taken in the Council of Ministers and upon the
 advice of the Supreme Court. They shall enter into effect upon publication
 but shall become null and void if the bill for their ratification is not filed
 with parliament before the date set in the enabling act.
 At the expiration of the time limit specified in the first paragraph of
 this article, ordinances may be modified only by law in matters which fall
 within the legislative domain.
 Art. 56. Laws which this Constitution characterizes as organic laws
 shall be passed and amended by an absolute majority of the members of
 the National Assembly.
 
 Togo
 
 899
 
 
 They may be promulgated only if the Supreme Court, to which they
 must be referred by the President of the Republic, has declared that they
 are in conformity with the Constitution. Article 54 shall not apply to
 organic laws.
 Art. 57. The deputies and the President of the Republic alike shall have
 the right to initiate amendments.
 Amendments of the Head of State may be presented by a member of
 the Government.
 Parliamentary bills and amendments shall not be admissible when their
 adoption would result either in a diminution of public resources or the
 creation or increase of public expenditures, unless such bills or amendments
 are accompanied by proposals for compensatory receipts.
 Art. 59. If it appears during the course of the legislative procedure
 that a bill or amendment does not fall within the domain of law, the
 Government may plead its inadmissibility.
 In case of disagreement between the Government and the Assembly,
 the Supreme Court, at the request of either party, shall rule within eight
 days.
 Art. 60. The Government may request that priority on the agenda
 of the National Assembly be given to a government or parliamentary
 bill or to a declaration of general policy and this request shall automatically
 be granted.
 Art. 61. The President of the Republic, the Vice-President and the
 members of the Government may, if they so desire, take part in the
 debates of the National Assembly. They may be heard at any time by the
 National Assembly and its commissions. They may be assisted by Govern-
 ment commissioners.
 Art. 62. The National Assembly shall have the following means of
 control over Government action:
 - the written question and the oral question.
 Representatives of the Government shall be obliged to reply. The
 questions and answers shall not be followed by any vote.
 Art. 63. At the opening of the National Assembly, and each year at
 the beginning of the first ordinary session, the President of the Republic
 shall explain to the National Assembly the general policy of his Govern-
 ment. This explanation shall be followed by debates which shall not give
 rise to any vote.
 Art. 64. The National Assembly may question the responsibility of the
 Government by passing a motion of censure. Such a motion shall be
 admissible only if it is signed by at least one third of the members of the
 National Assembly. A motion of censure may not be filed during the first
 two years of the legislature.
 The vote may only take place seventy two hours after the filing of the
 motion. Only the votes in favor of the motion of censure shall be counted.
 
 900
 
 Togo
 
 
 The motion may be adopted only by a majority of the members of the
 Assembly.
 If a -motion of censure is rejected, its signatories may not present
 another during the course of the same session.
 If the motion of censure is approved, the President of the Republic
 may either modify the composition of his Government, change it entirely,
 or he may dissolve the National Assembly by decree taken in the Council
 of Ministers.
 Art. 65. If the National Assembly is dissolved, general elections shall
 take place in accordance with the stipulations of Article 40. The elections
 for the President and Vice-President of the Government shall take place
 at the same time in accordance with the provisions of Article 22.
 These elections must take place not less than thirty and not more than
 sixty days after the publication of the decree of dissolution.
 TITLE VI
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
 Art. 66. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify
 treaties and international agreements.
 Art. 67. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties or agreements
 relative to international organization, those that imply a commitment
 for the finances of the State, those that modify provisions of a legislative
 nature, those relative to the status of persons, those that call for the
 cession, exchange or addition of territory may be ratified or approved
 only by a law. The same shall apply to the treaties and international
 agreements covered by the preceeding article.
 They shall go into effect only after ratification.
 No cession, no exchange and no addition of territory shall be valid
 without the consent of the populations concerned.
 Art. 68. If the Supreme Court, to which the matter has been referred
 by the President of the Republic or by the President of the National
 Assembly, declares that an international commitment contains a clause
 contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify or approve it
 may only take place after amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 69. Treaties and agreements duly ratified or approved shall,
 upon their publication, have an authority superior to that of the laws,
 subject, for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other
 party.
 
 Togo
 
 901
 
 
 Togo
 
 TITLE VII
 THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 70. The Supreme Court shall include four chambers.
 - the Constitutional Chamber,
 - the Judicial Chamber,
 - the Administrative Chamber,
 - the Chamber of Accounts.
 The President of the Supreme Court, who shall also preside over the
 Constitutional Chamber, shall be appointed for five years by decree taken
 in the Council of Ministers after consultation with and advice of the
 secretariat of the National Assembly.
 He shall have permanent tenure.
 The Supreme Court shall rule on the constitutionality of laws and
 international engagements and on conflicts of jurisdiction between the
 Government and Parliament. It shall judge any excesses of power by
 the administrative authorities.
 Art. 71. The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of the elec-
 tions of the President and Vice-President of the Republic. It shall examine
 any complaints and proclaim the results of the voting.
 Art. 72. The Supreme Court shall rule in cases of dispute concerning
 the elections of deputies to the National Assembly.
 Art. 73. The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of referendum
 procedures and shall proclaim their results.
 Art. 74. Organic laws before their promulgation, and the rules of
 procedure of the National Assembly before their entry into force, must
 be submitted to the Supreme Court which shall rule as to their conformity
 with the Constitution.
 Before their promulgation, other laws may be referred for the same
 purpose to the Supreme Court, either by the President of the Republic
 or by the President of the National Assembly.
 In the cases provided in this article, the Supreme Court must rule within
 a period of one month. This time limit may be reduced to eight days at
 the request of the Government.
 In all these cases, referral to the Supreme Court shall suspend the time
 limits for promulgation.
 Art. 75. The Supreme Court shall issue opinions and render decisions.
 There shall be no recourse from the decisions of the Supreme Court.
 They shall be binding on the Government, on Parliament and on the
 judicial authority.
 A provision which has been declared unconstitutional may neither be
 promulgated nor put into force.
 
 902
 
 
 Art. 76. An organic law shall fix the number and the status of the
 members of the Supreme Court. It shall determine the powers of the
 Supreme Court other than those described above, its rules of organization,
 operation and procedure.
 TITLE VIII
 THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 77. Justice shall be rendered over the territory of the Republic
 in the name of the Togolese people.
 Judges, in the exercise of their functions, shall be subject to no authority
 other than the law.
 The President of the Republic shall be the guarantor of the independence
 of the judicial authority.
 He shall be assisted by the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 78. The High Council of the Judiciary shall be presided over by the
 President of the Republic.
 The Minister of Justice shall automatically be the Vice-President.
 The composition, power, organization and procedure of the High Council
 of the Judiciary shall be established by an organic law.
 Art. 79. Magistrates shall be appointed by the President of the Republic
 on the proposal of the Minister of Justice, and with the advice of the High
 Council of the Judiciary. They shall have permanent tenure.
 The High Council of the Judiciary shall be the disciplinary jurisdiction
 for magistrates. For that purpose it shall be presided over by the President
 of the Judicial chamber of the Supreme Court.
 An organic law shall provide for the status of magistrates.
 Art. 80. The High Council of the Judiciary shall study cases of pardon
 and shall transmit them to the President of the Republic with its opinion.
 Art. 81. No one may be arbitrarily detained. The judicial authority,
 guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure respect for this principle under
 the conditions provided by law.
 TITLE IX
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 82. A High Court of Justice shall be instituted.
 It shall be composed of members elected by the National Assembly
 from its midst at the beginning of each legislature. It shall be presided
 over by a judge.
 An organic law shall fix the composition of a High Court, its rules
 of operation and the procedure to be followed before it.
 
 Togo
 
 903
 
 
 Art. 83. The President of the Republic shall not be held accountable
 for actions performed in the exercise of his office except in case of high
 treason. He may be indicted only by the National Assembly voting in
 open ballot by a majority of two thirds of its members. He shall be tried
 by the High Court of Justice.
 The Vice-President of the Republic and the members of the Government
 shall be criminally liable for actions performed in the exercise of their
 office and deemed to be crimes or misdemeanors at the time they were
 committed. The procedure defined above shall be applicable to them and
 to their accomplices. The same shall apply in cases of a conspiracy against
 the security of the State. In the cases provided for by the present paragraph
 the High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and misdemean-
 ors as well as by the determination of penalties as they are established in
 the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed.
 TITLE X
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 84. The Togolese Republic, one and indivisible, recognizes the
 existence of territorial units.
 The territorial units shall be created by law.
 A law shall determine the fundamental principles of the free adminis-
 tration, under the control of the state, of the territorial units, their powers
 and their resources.
 TITLE XI
 AMENDMENT
 Art. 85. The President of the Republic and the members of the National
 Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate amendments of the Consti-
 tution.
 Bills of amendment adopted by the National Assembly shall enter into
 force only they have been approved by referendum. However, a bill of
 amendment shall not presented for a referendum if the President of the
 Republic decides to submit it only to the National Assembly; in such a
 case, the amendment shall not be approved unless it receives a majority of
 two thirds of the members of the National Assembly.
 Finally, the President of the Republic may, if he considers it absolutely
 necessary, following consultation with the National Assembly, submit
 a bill of amendment of the constitution directly to popular referendum.
 In this case the bill must first be submitted to the Supreme Court for its
 opinion.
 
 Togo
 
 904
 
 
 No amendment procedure may be undertaken or pursued if it threatens
 the integrity of the territory.
 The republican form of the state may not be the subject of amendment.
 TITLE XII
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 86. The ordinances and measures taken by the provisional Govern-
 ment of the Togolese Republic since January 17, 1963 shall be validated
 by this Constitution, in particular those relating to the organization of the
 constitutional referendum, the election of the President of the Republic,
 of the Vice-President of the Republic and of the deputies to the National
 Assembly.
 The Provisional Government shall remain in office until official pro-
 clamation has been made of the results of the presidential election.
 Art. 87. The President and the Vice-President of the Republic shall
 take office immediately upon the official proclamation of the results
 of the presidential election, and as soon as the President of the Republic
 has taken the oath provided in Article 23.
 The new President of the Republic shall promulgate the constitution
 within twenty four hours following the official proclamation of the results
 of the constitutional referendum.
 Art. 88. The legislative measures necessary to the establishment of
 the institutions and, pending this establishment, to the functioning of the
 governmental authorities, shall be taken by ordinance by the President
 of the Republic in the Council of Ministers.
 These ordinances shall have the force of an organic or of an ordinary law
 as the case may be, and shall be executed as such.
 The legislation applicable in Togo at the date of the entry into force
 of this Constitution shall remain in effect in so far as it is not contrary
 to the provisions of this Constitution.
 Art. 89. This law shall be executed as the Constitution of the Togolese
 Republic.
 
 Togo
 
 905
 
 
</pre>
