<pre>
 South Africa
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of
 SOUTH AFRICA'
 April 25, 1961
 In Humble Submission to Almighty God, Who controls the destinies
 of nations and the history of peoples;
 Who gathered our forebears together from many lands and gave them
 this their own;
 Who has guided them from generation to generation;
 Who has wondrously delivered them from the dangers that beset
 them;
 We, who are here in Parliament assembled, declare that whereas we
 Are conscious of our responsibility towards God and man;
 Are convinced of the necessity to stand united
 To safeguard the integrity and freedom of our country;
 To secure the maintenance of law and order;
 To further the contentment and spiritual and material welfare of all
 in our midst;
 Are prepared to accept our duty to seek world peace in association with
 all peace-loving nations; and
 Are charged with the task of founding the Republic of South Africa and
 giving it a constitution best suited to the traditions and history of our
 land:
 Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, the
 Senate and the House of Assembly of the Union of South Africa, as
 follows:
 0
 PART I
 THE REPUBLIC
 1. The Union of South Africa consisting of the provinces of the Cape
 of Good Hope, Natal, the Transvaal and the Orange Free State as they
 1 Act to Constitute the Republic of South Africa and to Provide for Matters Incidental
 Thereto. Union Gazette Extraordinary April 25, 1961, No. 32, 1961. Supplied by
 South African Embassy, Athens.
 
 808
 
 
 existed immediately prior to the commencement of this Act, shall as from
 the thirty-first day of May, 1961, be a republic under the name of the
 Republic of South Africa.
 2. The people of the Republic of South Africa acknowledge the
 sovereignty and guidance of Almighty God.
 3. As from the date mentioned in section one, any reference in any law
 in force immediately prior to the commencement of this Act, in the
 Union of South Africa or in any other territory in respect of which
 Parliament is competent to legislate:
 (a) to the Union of South Africa or the State, shall be construed
 as a reference to the Republic;
 (b) to the Crown or the King or the Queen or the Governor-General
 shall be construed as a reference to the Republic or the State President
 as the circumstances may require;
 (c) to the King-in-Council or the Queen-in-Council or the Governor-
 General-in-Council, shall be construed as a reference to the State
 President.
 PART II
 NATIONAL FLAG AND ANTHEM
 4. There shall be a National Flag of the Republic of which the design
 shall be as set out in section five.
 5. (1) The National Flag of the Republic shall be a flag consisting
 of three horizontal stripes of equal width from top to bottom orange,
 white and blue, on which there shall appear:
 (a) in the centre of the white stripe, the flag of the republic of "De
 Oranjevrijstaat" hanging vertically and spread in full; and
 (b) on opposite sides and adjoining the flag referred to in paragraph
 (a):
 (i) the Union Jack, as it existed in 1927, horizontally spread in
 full towards the pole; and
 (ii) the Vierkleur of "De Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek" horizontally
 spread in full away from the pole.
 (2) The flags referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1)
 shall all be of the same size and of a shape proportionally the same as
 that of the National Flag, the width of each of such flags shall be equal
 to one-third of the width of the white stripe on the National Flag, and
 the flags referred to in paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) shall be equidistant
 from the margins of the said white stripe.
 6. The National Anthem of the Republic shall be "Die Stem van Suid-
 Afrika."
 
 South Africa
 
 809
 
 
 Sou& Africa
 
 PART III
 THE STATE PRESIDENT
 7. (1) The head of the Republic shall be the State President.
 (2) The command-in-chief of the South African Defence Force is vested
 in the State President.
 (3) He shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have power:
 (a) with due regard to the provisions of this Act to dissolve the
 Senate or the House of Assembly or the Senate and the House of
 Assembly simultaneously;
 (b) in accordance with the provisions of sections twenty and twenty-
 one to appoint Ministers and deputies to Ministers;
 (c) to confer honors;
 (d) to appoint and to accredit, to receive and to recognize Am-
 bassadors, Plenipotentiaries, diplomatic representatives and other
 diplomatic officers, consuls and consular officers;
 (e) with due regard to the provisions of this Act to appoint the
 times for the holding of sessions of Parliament and to prorogue
 Parliament;
 (f) to pardon or reprieve offenders, either unconditionally or subject
 to such conditions as he may deem fit, and to remit any fines,
 penalties or forfeitures;
 (g) to enter into and ratify international conventions, treaties and
 agreements;
 (h) to proclaim and terminate martial law;
 (i) to declare war and make peace;
 (j) to make such appointments as he may deem fit under powers
 conferred upon him by any law, and to exercise such powers and
 perform such functions as may be conferred or assigned to him under
 this Act or any other law.
 (4) The State President shall in addition as Head of the State have such
 powers and functions as were immediately prior to the commencement of
 this Act possessed by the Queen by way of prerogative.
 (5) The constitutional conventions which existed immediately prior
 to the commencement of this Act shall not be affected by the provisions
 of this Act.
 8. (1) The State President shall be elected by an electoral college
 consisting of the members of the Senate and the House of Assembly,
 at a meeting to be called in accordance with the provisions of this section
 and presided over by the Chief Justice of South Africa or a judge of
 appeal designated by him.
 (2) The election of a State President shall be held at a time and place
 
 810
 
 
 to be fixed by the Speaker or (in his absence) the Secretary to the House
 of Assembly and made known by notice in the Gazette not less than fourteen
 days before such election.
 (3) The date so fixed shall in respect of the first such election be a
 date before the thirty first day of May, 1961, and in the case of any
 subsequent such election a date not less than one month and not more
 than three months before the termination of the period of office of the
 State President then holding office: Provided that if the State President
 dies or for any other reason vacates his office before the expiration of his
 period of office a date within three months after the office became vacant
 shall be so fixed.
 (4) No person may be elected or serve as State President unless he is
 qualified to be nominated or elected and to take his seat as a member of
 the Senate.
 (5) Any person holding any public office in respect of which he receives
 any remuneration or allowance out of public funds, who is elected as
 State President, shall vacate such office with effect from the date on which
 he is elected.
 9. (1) Nominations of candidates for election as State President shall
 be called for at the meeting at which the election is to take place, by the
 person presiding thereat.
 (2) Every nomination shall be submitted in the form prescribed and
 shall be signed by two members of the electoral college and also by the
 person nominated, unless he has in writing or by telegram signified his
 willingness to accept nomination: Provided that in the case of the person
 for the time being holding office as State President, nomination shall
 be by way of a decision such as is provided for in paragraph (a) of sub-
 section (1) of section ten.
 (3) The names of the persons duly nominated as provided in sub-
 section (2) shall be announced at the meeting at which the election is to
 take place by the person presiding thereat, and no debate shall be allowed
 at the election.
 (4) If in respect of any election only one nomination has been received,
 the person presiding at the meeting shall declare the candidate in question
 to be duly elected.
 (5) Where more than one candidate is nominated for election, a vote
 shall be taken by secret ballot, each member of the electoral college
 present at the meeting in question having one vote, and any candidate
 in whose favour a majority of all the votes cast is recorded, shall be
 declared duly elected by the person presiding at the meeting.
 (6) (a) If no candidate obtains a majority of all the votes so cast,
 the candidate who received the smallest number of votes shall be
 eliminated and a further ballot taken in respect of the remaining
 candidates, this procedure being repeated as often as may be neces-
 
 South Africa
 
 811
 
 
 sary until a candidate receives a majority of all the votes cast and is
 declared duly elected.
 (b) Whenever two or more candidates being the lowest on the poll
 have received the same number of votes, the electoral college shall
 by separate vote, to be repeated as often as may be necessary,
 determine which of those candidates shall for the purposes of para-
 graph (a) be eliminated.
 (7) (a) Whenever:
 (i) only two candidates have been nominated; or
 (ii) after the elimination of one or more candidates in accordance
 with the provisions of this section, only two candidates remain,
 and there is an equality of votes between those two candidates,
 a further meeting shall be called in accordance with the provisions
 of section eight, and the provisions of this section shall apply as if
 such further meeting were the first meeting called for the purposes
 of the election in question.
 (b) At the third meeting called in connection with any particular
 election, the person presiding at the meeting shall in the event of an
 equality of votes between any two candidates under the circumstances
 described in paragraph (a), have and exercise a casting vote.
 (8) (a) The Speaker of the House of Assembly shall make rules in
 regard to the procedure to be observed at a meeting of the electoral
 college, including rules prescribing the form in which any nomination
 shall be submitted, and rules defining the duties of the presiding
 officer and of any person appointed to assist him and prescribing
 the manner in which the ballot at any such meeting shall be conducted.
 (b) Any such rules shall be made known in such manner as the
 Speaker of the House of Assembly may consider necessary.
 10. (1) (a) The State President shall hold office for a period of
 seven years from the date upon which he takes the oath prescribed
 in section twelve, and shall not on termination of his period of office
 be eligible for re-election, unless it is expressly otherwise decided
 by the electoral college
 (b) He shall cease to hold office on a resolution passed by the Senate
 and by the House of Assembly during the same session declaring
 him to be removed from office on the ground of misconduct or
 inability to perform efficiently the duties of his office.
 (2) (a) No resolution shall be taken under paragraph (b) of sub-
 section (1), except after consideration of a report of a joint committee
 of the Senate and the House of Assembly appointed in pursuance of a
 resolution of the House of Assembly which has been concurred in by
 the Senate.
 (b) The House of Assembly shall not adopt a resolution that such a
 committee be appointed, unless there has previously been submitted
 
 South Africa
 
 812
 
 
 to the Speaker of the House of Assembly a petition signed by not less
 than thirty members of the House of Assembly and requesting that
 such a committee be appointed.
 (c) In connection with any resolution contemplated in paragraph (b)
 no debate shall be allowed either in the Senate or in the House of
 Assembly.
 (8) The State President may resign by lodging his resignation in writing
 with the Speaker of the House of Assembly, who shall forthwith advise the
 Prime Minister of such resignation.
 (4) The State President shall not be absent from the Republic except
 with the prior consent of the Executive Council.
 11. Whenever the office of State President is vacant or the State
 President is for any reason unable to perform the duties of his office,
 the President of the Senate shall serve as Acting State President, and,
 if the office of President of the Senate is vacant or the holder of that office
 is unable to act, the Speaker of the House of Assembly, or, if his office
 is vacant or he is unable to act, a person appointed by the Executive
 Council shall serve as Acting State President.
 12. The State President and any Acting State President shall before
 assuming office make and subscribe an oath of office in the following
 form before the Chief Justice of South Africa or a Judge of the Supreme
 Court of South Africa:
 "In the presence of Almighty God and in the full realization of the high
 calling I assume as State President/Acting State President in the service
 of my people, I, A.B., do swear to be faithful to the Republic of South
 Africa and do solemnly and sincerely promise at all times to promote
 that which will advance it, to oppose all that may harm it and to dedicate
 myself to the welfare of its inhabitants, to obey, observe, uphold and
 maintain the Constitution and all other Law of the Republic, to discharge
 my duties with all my strength and talents to the best of my knowledge
 and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience, to do justice unto
 all and to devote myself to the well-being of my people.
 "May the Almighty by His grace guide and sustain me in keeping this
 oath with honor and dignity.
 "So help me God."
 13. Any person who commits any act which is calculated to violate the
 dignity or injure the reputation of the State President or an Acting
 State President, shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to
 a fine not exceeding two thousand rand or imprisonment for a period not
 exceeding five years.
 14. (1) There shall be paid to the State President out of and as a
 charge on the Consolidated Revenue Fund, in addition to any allowances
 appropriated from time to time by Parliament, and apart from any privileges
 which he may enjoy, a salary of twenty-five thousand rand per annum.
 
 813
 
 South Africa
 
 
 (2) The salary of the State President shall not be reduced during his
 term of office.
 15. (1) There shall be paid out of and as a charge on the Consolidated
 Revenue Fund:
 (a) to any person who has at any time occupied the office of State
 President, a pension at the rate of six thousand rand per annum;
 (b) to the widow of any such person, unless her marriage to him
 took place after the date on which he vacated office, a pension at
 the rate of two thirds of the rate of the pension payable to such
 person.
 (2) Any pension under sub-section (a) shall be payable:
 (a) in the case of the State President with effect from the day
 following that upon which he vacated office;
 (b) in the case of his widow, with effect from the day following
 that upon which she became a widow.
 (3) Notwithstanding the repeal by section one hundred and twenty
 of section ten bis of the South Africa Act, 1909, any pension which but
 for such repeal would have been payable to any person under the latter
 section shall continue to be payable as if the repeal had not been effected.
 PART IV
 EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT
 16. (1) The executive government of the Republic in regard to any
 aspect of its domestic or foreign affairs is vested in the State President,
 acting on the advice of the Executive Council.
 (2) Save where otherwise expressly stated or necessarily implied, any
 reference in this Act to the State President shall be deemed to be a reference
 to the State President acting on the advice of the Executive Council.
 (3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section shall not be
 construed to affect the exercise by the State President of his powers under
 section twenty, in so far as it relates to the appointment of Ministers, or
 section twenty-five, paragraph (a) of sub-section (1) of section thirty-three
 or section forty-seven, or the constitutional conventions relating to the
 exercise of his functions by the State President.
 17. The Executive Council shall consist of the Ministers appointed
 under section twenty for the time being holding office.
 18. (1) There shall be a Seal of the Republic, showing the coat of
 arms of the Republic with the circumscription "Republic of South
 Africa-Republiek van Suid-Afrika."
 (2) The Seal shall be in the custody of the State President, and shall, save
 insofar as may be otherwise determined by the State President, be used
 on all public documents on which the Royal Seal or the Royal Signet of
 
 814
 
 &ouh Africa
 
 
 the Union of South Africa or the Governor-General's Great Seal was
 immediately prior to the commencement of this Act required to be used.
 19. (1) The will and pleasure of the State President as head of the
 executive government of the Republic shall be expressed in writing under
 his signature, and every instrument signed by him shall be countersigned
 by a Minister.
 (2) The signature of the State President on any instrument shall be
 confirmed as provided in section eighteen.
 20. (1) The State President may appoint persons not exceeding eighteen
 in number to administer such departments of State of the Republic as the
 State President may establish.
 (2) Persons appointed under sub-section (1) shall hold office during
 the pleasure of the State President and shall be the Ministers of the
 Republic.
 (3) No Minister shall hold office for a longer period than three months
 unless he is or becomes a member of the Senate or the House of Assembly.
 (4) Whenever any Minister is from any cause whatever unable to
 perform any of the functions of his office, the State President may ap-
 point any other member of the Executive Council to act in the said
 Minister's stead, either generally or in the performance of any particular
 function.
 (5) A Minister shall before assuming his duties as such or as a member
 of the Executive Council make and subscribe an oath before the State
 President or a person designated by him, in the following form:
 "I, A.B., do hereby swear to be faithful to the Republic of South Africa
 and undertake befere God to honor this oath; to hold my office as
 Minister and as a member of the Executive Council with honor and
 dignity; to respect and uphold the Constitution and all other Law of the
 Republic; to be a true and faithful counsellor; not to divulge directly
 or indirectly any matters brought before the Executive Council which
 are entrusted to me under secrecy; and to perform the duties of my office
 conscientiously and to the best of my ability.
 "So help me God."
 (6) Any department of State established under section fourteen of the
 South Africa Act, 1909, and in existence immediately prior to the com-
 mencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been duly established
 under this section, and any officer appointed under sub-section (1) of the
 first-mentioned section to administer any such department and holding
 office immediately prior to such commencement, shall be deemed to have
 been duly appointed under this section to administer that department,
 but shall make and subscribe the oath prescribed in sub-section (5) before
 assuming his duties.
 21. (1) The State President may appoint not more than six persons
 to hold office during his pleasure as deputies to any Minister in his
 
 South Africa
 
 815
 
 
 capacity as the person appointed to administer any particular department
 of State, and any such deputy may on behalf of that Minister and under
 the designation of Deputy Minister of the department in question, exercise
 such of the powers and perform such of the duties and function assigned
 to that Minister in terms of any law or otherwise as the said Minister may
 from time to time determine, but shall not be a member of the Executive
 Council.
 (2) Any person appointed under this section shall before assuming the
 duties of his office make and subscribe before the State President or a
 person designated by him for the purpose, an oath in such form as the
 State President may determine.
 (3) No person appointed under this section shall hold office for a
 longer period than three months unless he is or becomes a member of the
 Senate or the House of Assembly.
 (4) Any person appointed under sub-section (3) of section fourteen
 of the South Africa Act, 1909, and holding office immediately prior to the
 commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been duly appointed
 under this section, and may, subject to the provisions of this section,
 continue to exercise or perform any powers, duties and functions which
 immediately prior to such commencement could be exercised or performed
 by him by virtue of a determination under subsection (3) of the first-
 mentioned section, as if he were authorized to exercise such powers or
 perform such duties or functions in pursuance of a determination made
 by the Minister concerned in terms of this section, but shall make and
 subscribe the oath required under sub-section (2) before assuming the
 duties of his office.
 22. The appointment and removal of persons in the service of the
 Republic shall be vested in the State President, unless the appointment
 or removal is delegated by the State President to some other authority
 or is in terms of this Act or any other law vested in some other authority.
 23. Save as is otherwise provided in section twenty-seven, Pretoria shall
 be the seat of Government of the Republic.
 PART V
 PARLIAMENT
 24. (1) The legislative power of the Republic shall be vested in the
 Parliament of the Republic which shall consist of the State President,
 a Senate, and a House of Assembly.
 (2) The Senate and the House of Assembly as constituted for the
 purposes of the South Africa Act, 1909, and in existence immediately
 prior to the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been
 duly constituted for the purposes of this Act, and any person elected or
 
 South Africa
 
 816
 
 
 nominated as a member of the said Senate or House of Assembly and
 holding office immediately prior to such commencement shall be deemed
 to have been duly elected or nominated to the Senate or the House of
 Assembly established by this Act: Provided that any such person shall
 before taking his seat as a member of the Senate or the House of Assembly
 established by this Act, make and subscribe the oath prescribed in section
 fifty-two.
 (3) Any reference in any law to Parliament or any House of Parliament
 or the Senate or the House of Assembly or a member thereof, shall be
 construed as a reference to the Parliament or the Senate or the House of
 Assembly established by this Act or to a member of the said Senate or
 House of Assembly.
 (4) Where any matter which has during the session of Parliament
 (as constituted in terms of the South Africa Act, 1909) immediately
 preceding the commencement of this Act, been brought before the said
 Parliament or Senate or House of Assembly, has not before such commen-
 cement been disposed of, that matter may be further dealt with or con-
 sidered by the Parliament or Senate or House of Assembly, as the case
 may be, established by this Act, and any steps taken in connection with
 that matter by such first-mentioned Parliament or Senate or House of
 Assembly shall be deemed to have been taken by the Parliament or Senate
 or House of Assembly, as the case may be established by this Act.
 (5) Any Bill passed prior to the commencement of this Act by the
 Senate and by the House of Assembly (as constituted in terms of the
 South Africa Act, 1909) which has been assented to by the Governor-
 General, but has not been promulgated before such commencement, may
 be promulgated thereafter and shall thereupon have full force and effect
 as an Act of Parliament in all respects as if this Act had not been passed,
 but any reference in any such Act to any authority referred to in the
 South Africa Act, 1909, shall be construed as a reference to the corre
 sponding authority established under this Act.
 (6) If any Bill brought before Parliament or the Senate or the House
 of Assembly (as constituted in terms of the South Africa Act, 1909)
 prior to the commencement of this Act, has not been passed by both such
 Senate and such House of Assembly or if the Governor-General has not
 assented to any Bill so passed, that Bill may be further dealt with or
 considered by the Parliament or the Senate or the House of Assembly,
 as the case may be, established by this Act or may be assented to by the
 State President, as the circumstances may require, and, where it is so
 assented to, the Bill may be promulgated and shall have full force and
 effect as an Act of the Parliament established by this Act: Provided that
 any reference in such a Bill to any authority established by the South
 Africa Act, 1909, shall under the directions of the President of the Senate
 and the Speaker of the House of Assembly be altered before the pro-
 
 South Africa
 
 817
 
 
 mulgation thereof to a reference to the corresponding authority established
 by this Act.
 25. (1) The State President may appoint such times for holding the
 sessions of Parliament as he thinks fit, and may also from time to time,
 by proclamation in the Gazette or otherwise, prorogue Parliament.
 (2) If immediately before the commencement of this Act the Parlia-
 ment established under the South Africa Act, 1909, is in session by virtue
 of a proclamation issued under section twenty of that Act, that session
 shall be resumed from such date after such commencement as may prior
 to the said commencement be determined by resolution of the Senate
 and of the House of Assembly established under that Act in the same
 manner as if it were a session of the Parliament established by this Act
 for the holding of which the time had been duly appointed in terms of
 this Act, and such resumed session shall be the first session of the first
 Parliament established by this Act.
 26. There shall be a session of Parliament once at least in every year,
 so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last
 sitting of Parliament in one session and its first sitting in the next session.
 27. Cape Town shall be the seat of the Legislature of the Republic.
 Senate
 28. (1) The Senate shall subject to the provisions of the South-West
 Africa Affairs Amendment Act, 1949 (Act No. 23 of 1949) and the Separate
 Representation of Voters Act, 1951 (Act No. 46 of 1951), consist of:
 (a) eight senators nominated by the State President of whom two
 shall be nominated from each province; and
 (b) so many senators, but not less than eight, in the case of each
 province as are equal to one tenth of the number of the electoral
 divisions into which that province has at the last delimitation under
 this Act, for the election of members of the House of Assembly been
 divided, together with the electoral divisions into which that province
 has been so divided for the election of provincial councillors.
 (2) Where in the case of any province the figure to be divided by ten
 for the purpose of determining the number of senators to be elected in
 respect of that province in terms of paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) is
 not a multiple of ten, that figure shall for the said purpose be assumed to
 be the lowest multiple of ten above the said figure.
 (3) The senators referred to in paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) shall
 in the case of each province be elected jointly by the sitting members of
 the House of Assembly and provincial councillors for that province other
 than the members and provincial councillors elected under the Separate
 Representation of Voters Act, 1951.
 29. (1) The senators nominated by the State President in terms of
 
 818
 
 South Africa
 
 
 paragraph (a) of sub-section (1) of section twenty-eight shall, subject to the
 provisions of section thirty-three, hold their seats for five years.
 (2) (a) The State President shall when nominating senators have
 regard to the desirability of ensuring that the Senate will as far as
 practicable consist of persons having knowledge of matters affecting
 the various interests of the inhabitants of the Republic.
 (b) When nominating senators, the State President shall have
 regard further to the requirement that at least one of the two senators
 nominated from each province under this section shall be thoroughly
 acquainted, by reason of official experience or otherwise, with the
 interests of the colored population in the province for which the
 said senator is nominated, and that the said senator should be capable
 inter alia of serving as the channel through which the interests of the
 said colored population in that province may be promoted.
 (3) If the seat of a senator so nominated becomes vacant, the State
 President shall nominate another person to hold the seat until the com-
 pletion of the period for which the person in whose stead he is nominated,
 would have held the seat.
 30. (1) The senators elected under sub-section (3) of section twenty-eight
 shall hold their seats for five years unless the Senate be sooner dissolved.
 (2) If the seat of an elected senator becomes vacant, the sitting members
 of the House of Assembly and the provincial councillors for the province
 concerned (other than the members and provincial councillors elected
 under the Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951), shall elect a
 person to hold the seat until the completion of the period for which the
 person in whose stead he is elected, would have held the seat.
 (3) The election of senators shall take place according to the principle
 of proportional representation, each voter having one transferable vote.
 (4) The State President may make regulations in regard to the election
 of senators under this Act, including regulations prescribing the method
 of voting and of transferring and counting votes and the duties of returning
 officers in connection with such elections.
 31. The Senate may from time to time establish standing committees
 for various matters as it may deem fit, and any Minister or deputy of a
 Minister may at any time with due regard to the rules of the Senate,
 move that any matter be referred to such a committee for investigation
 and report.
 32. The Prime Minister or any Minister acting on his behalf shall at
 the commencement of each session and may from time to time during
 the course of any session of Parliament as circumstances may require,
 make known what bills are to be introduced in the Senate during that
 session.
 33. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other
 law the State President may:
 
 South Africa
 
 819
 
 
 (a) at any time by proclamation in the Gazette dissolve the Senate
 simultaneously with the House of Assembly;
 (b) dissolve the Senate at any time within one hundred and twenty
 days of any dissolution of the House of Assembly or the expiry
 of the term of office of a provincial council under section seventy-one.
 (2) Upon any such dissolution of the Senate all the members of the
 Senate, including those members who were elected or nominated under
 the South-West Africa Affairs Amendment Act, 1949 (Act No. 23 of
 1949), or the Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951 (Act No. 46
 of 1951), shall vacate their seats.
 (3) Any senator nominated in terms of section twenty-eight of this
 Act or under the South-West Africa Affairs Amendment Act, 1949,
 or the Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951, shall, subject to the
 provisions of this Act and any other law, vacate his seat if the Prime
 Minister vacates his office and another person becomes Prime Minister
 and the State President publishes a notice in the Gazette that a change of
 Government has occurred.
 34. No person shall be qualified to be a senator under this Act unless he:
 (a) is at least thirty years of age;
 (b) is qualified to be registered as a voter for the election of members
 of the House of Assembly in one of the provinces;
 (c) has resided for five years within the limits of the Republic;
 (d) is a white person and is a South African citizen in terms of the
 provisions of the South African Citizenship Act, 1949 (Act No. 44 of
 1949).
 35. (1) The Senate shall, before proceeding to the dispatch of any
 other business, choose a senator to be the President of the Senate, and
 as often as the office of President becomes vacant the Senate shall again
 choose a senator to be the President.
 (2) The President shall cease to hold office if he ceases to be a senator
 and he may be removed from office by a vote of the Senate, or he may
 resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the State President.
 36. Prior to or during any absence of the President of the Senate the
 Senate may choose a senator to perform his duties in his absence.
 37. (1) A senator may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
 State President, resign his seat, which thereupon shall become vacant.
 (2) Whenever the seat of a senator becomes vacant, whether in con-
 sequence of his resignation or otherwise, the State President shall as soon
 as practicable cause steps to be taken to have the vacancy filled.
 38. The presence of at least fifteen senators shall be necessary to
 constitute a meeting of the Senate for the exercise of its powers.
 39. All questions in the Senate shall be determined by a majority
 of votes of senators present other than the President or the presiding
 senator, who shall, however, have and exercise a casting vote in the case
 of an equality of votes.
 
 South Africa
 
 820
 
 
 South Africa
 
 House of Assembly
 40. The House of Assembly shall be composed of:
 (a) one hundred and fifty members, each of whom shall be directly
 by the persons entitled to vote at an election of such a member in an
 electoral division delimited as provided in section forty-three;
 (b) six members elected in accordance with the provisions of the
 South-West Africa Affairs Amendment Act, 1949 (Act No. 23 of
 1949); and
 (c) four members elected in accordance with the provisions of the
 Separate Representation of Voters Act, 1951 (Act No. 46 of 1951).
 41. At any general election of members of the House of Assembly
 under this Act, all polls shall be taken on one and the same day in all the
 electoral divisions throughout the Republic, such day to be appointed by
 the State President.
 42. (1) At intervals of not less than five years and not more than ten
 years commencing from the last delimitation of electoral divisions under
 the South Africa Act, 1909, the State President shall appoint a delimitation
 commission consisting of three judges of the Supreme Court of South
 Africa, which shall divide each province into so many electoral divisions
 that their number bears, as nearly as possible, the same ratio to one
 hundred and fifty as, in terms of the current voters' lists, duly corrected
 up to the latest possible date, the number of white voters in that province
 bears to the total number of white voters in the Republic.
 (2) In dividing a province into electoral divisions in terms of sub-
 section (1) the said commission shall act in accordance with the provisions
 of section forty-three.
 43. (1) For the purposes of any division of the provinces into electoral
 divisions, the quota of each province shall be obtained by dividing the
 total number of voters in the province as ascertained from an examination
 of the current voters' lists by the number of members of the House of
 Assembly to be elected therein.
 (2) Each province shall be divided into electoral divisions in such a
 manner that each such division shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
 section (3), contain a number of voters as nearly as may be equal to the
 quota of the province.
 (3) The delimitation commission shall give due consideration to:
 (a) community or diversity of interests;
 (b) means of communication;
 (e) physical features;
 (d) boundaries of existing electoral divisions;
 (e) sparsity or density of population,
 in such manner that, while taking the quota of voters as the basis of
 
 821
 
 
 divisions, the commission may depart therefrom whenever it is deemed
 necessary, but in no case to any greater extent than fifteen per cent more
 or fifteen per cent less than the quota.
 44. (1) A commission constituted under the provisions of section
 forty-two shall submit to the State President:
 (a) a list of electoral divisions, with the names given to them by the
 commission and a description of the boundaries of every such division;
 (b) a map or maps showing the electoral divisions into which the
 provinces have been divided;
 (c) such further particulars as it considers necessary.
 (2) The State President may refer to the commission for its con-
 sideration all matters relating to such list or arising out of the powers
 or duties of the commission.
 (3) The State President shall by proclamation in the Gazette make
 known the names and boundaries of the electoral divisions as finally
 settled and certified by the commission, or a majority thereof, and there-
 after, until there shall be a re-division, the electoral divisions as named
 and defined shall be the electoral divisions of the Republic in the provinces.
 (4) If any discrepancy arises between the description of the divisions
 and the aforesaid map or maps, the description shall prevail.
 45. Any alteration in the number of members of the House of Assembly
 to be elected in the several provinces, and any re-division of the provinces
 into electoral divisions, shall, in respect of the election of members of the
 House of Assembly, come into operation at the next general election held
 after the completion of the re-division or of any allocation consequent
 upon such alteration, and not earlier.
 46. No person shall be qualified to be a member of the House of
 Assembly under this Act, unless he:
 (a) is qualified to be registered as a voter for the election of members
 of the House of Assembly in one of the provinces;
 (b) has resided for five years within the limits of the Republic;
 (c) is a white person and is a South African citizen in terms of the
 provisions of the South African Citizenship Act, 1949 (Act No. 44
 of 1949).
 47. (1) Every House of Assembly shall continue for five years from the
 first meeting thereof, and no longer, but may at any time be dissolved
 by the State President by proclamation in the Gazette.
 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the date of the first meeting
 of the first Parliament under this Act shall be taken to have been the
 fourth day of July, 1958.
 48. (1) The House of Assembly shall, before proceeding to the dispatch
 of any other business, choose a member to be the Speaker of the House,
 and, as often as the office of Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall
 again choose a member to be the Speaker.
 
 822
 
 Soth Africa
 
 
 (2) The Speaker shall cease to hold his office if he ceases to be a member
 of the House of Assembly, and may be removed from office by resolution
 of the House and may resign his office or his seat by writing under his
 hand addressed to the State President.
 49. Prior to or during the absence of the Speaker, the House of Assembly
 may choose a member to perform his duties in his absence.
 50. The presence of at least thirty members of the House of Assembly
 shall be necessary to constitute a meeting of the House for the exercise
 of its powers.
 51. All questions in the House of Assembly shall be determined by a
 majority of votes of members present other than the Speaker or the
 presiding member, who shall, however, have and exercise a casting vote
 in the case of an equality of votes.
 Both Senate and House of Assembly
 52. Every senator and every member of the House of Assembly shall,
 before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the State President, or
 some person authorized by him, an oath in the following form:
 "I, A.B., do swear to be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and
 solemnly promise to perform my duties as a member of the Senate/
 House of Assembly to the best of my ability.
 "So help me God."
 53. Notwithstanding any dissolution of the Senate or the House of
 Assembly under this Act, whether by effluxion of time or otherwise:
 (a) every person who at the date of the dissolution is a member of
 the body concerned shall remain a member thereof;
 (b) the said body shall remain competent to perform its functions;
 and
 (c) the State President shall have power to summon Parliament for
 the despatch of business,
 during the period following such dissolution up to and including the day
 immediately preceding the polling day for the election held in pursuance
 of such dissolution, in the same manner in all respects as if the dissolution
 had not occurred.
 54. (1) A member of the Senate who is elected as a member of the
 House of Assembly shall vacate his seat as a senator with effect from the
 date on which he becomes a member of the House of Assembly.
 (2) A member of the House of Assembly who is elected or nominated
 as a member of the Senate shall vacate his seat as a member of the House
 of Assembly with effect from the date on which he becomes a member
 of the Senate.
 (3) A member of the Senate or the House of Assembly who is elected
 as a member of a provincial council shall cease to be a member of the
 
 South Africa
 
 823
 
 
 Senate or the House of Assembly with effect from the date upon which
 he becomes a member of that provincial council.
 (4) A Minister who is a member of the Senate or the House of Assembly
 and a member of the Senate or the House of Assembly holding office as a
 deputy to any Minister, shall have the right to sit and speak in the Senate
 and in the House of Assembly, but shall vote only where he is a member.
 55. No person shall be capable of being elected or nominated or of
 sitting as a member of the Senate or the House of Assembly, if he:
 (a) has at any time been convicted of any offence for which he has
 been sentenced to imprisonment without the option of a fine for a
 period of not less than twelve months, unless he has received a grant
 of amnesty or a free pardon, or unless such imprisonment has expired
 at least five years before the date of his election or nomination; or
 (b) is an unrehabilitated insolvent; or
 (c) is of unsound mind, and has been so declared by a competent
 court; or
 (d) holds any office of profit under the Republic: Provided that the
 following persons shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit
 under the Republic for the purposes of this paragraph, namely:
 (i) a Minister of the Republic, or any person holding office as
 deputy to any Minister;
 (ii) a person in receipt of a pension from the Republic;
 (iii) an officer or member of the South African Defence Force on
 retired or half-pay, or an officer or member of the South African
 Defence Force whose services are not wholly employed by the
 Republic;
 (iv) any person who has been appointed or has become a justice
 of the peace under section two of the Justices of the Peace and
 Oaths Act, 1914 (Act No. 16 of 1914);
 (v) any person who, while the Republic is at war, is an officer or
 member of the South African Defence Force or any other force
 or service established by or under the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No. 44
 of 1957);
 (vi) a member of any council, committee, board or similar body
 established by or under any law who receives no payment in respect
 of his services on such council, committee, board or body in excess
 of an allowance at a rate not exceeding eleven rand for each day on
 which he renders such services, together with the reimbursement
 of any travelling expenses incurred by him in the course of such
 services.
 56. A senator or member of the House of Assembly shall vacate his
 seat, if he:
 (a) becomes subject to any of the disabilities mentioned in section
 fifty-five; or
 
 South Africa
 
 824
 
 
 (b) ceases to be qualified as required by law; or
 (c) fails for a whole ordinary session to attend without the special
 leave of the Senate or the House of Assembly, as the case may be,
 unless his absence is due to his serving, while the Republic is at war,
 with the South African Defence Force or any other force or service
 established by or under the Defence Act, 1957 (Act No. 44 of 1957).
 57. Any person who is by law incapable of sitting as a senator or
 member of the House of Assembly, and who while so incapable and
 knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is so incapable,
 sits or votes as a member of the Senate or the House of Assembly, shall
 be liable to a penalty of two hundred rand for each day on which he so
 sits or votes, to be recovered on behalf of the Treasury of the Republic
 by action in any division of the Supreme Court of South Africa.
 58. (1) The Senate or the House of Assembly may make rules and
 orders with respect to the order and conduct of its business and proceedings.
 (2) If a joint sitting of the Senate and the House of Assembly is required
 under the provisions of this Act, it shall be convened by the State President
 by message to the Senate and to the House of Assembly.
 (3) At any joint sitting referred to in sub-section (2) the Speaker of the
 House of Assembly shall preside and the rules of the House of Assembly
 shall, as far as practicable, apply.
 Powers of Parliament
 59. (1) Parliament shall be the sovereign legislative authority in and
 over the Republic, and shall have full power to make laws for the peace,
 order and good government of the Republic.
 (2) No court of law shall be competent to enquire into or to pronounce
 upon the validity of any Act passed by Parliament, other than an Act
 which repeals or amends or purports to repeal or amend the provisions of
 section one hundred and eight or one hundred and eighteen.
 60. (1) Bills appropriating revenue or moneys or imposing taxation
 shall originate only in the House of Assembly.
 (2) A Bill shall not be deemed to appropriate revenue or moneys or
 to impose taxation by reason only of its containing provisions for the
 imposition or appropriation of fines or other pecuniary penalties.
 (3) The Senate may not amend any Bills so far as they impose taxation
 or appropriate revenue or moneys for the services of the Government.
 (4) The Senate may not amend any Bills so as to increase any proposed
 charge or burden on the people.
 61. Any Bill which appropriates revenue or moneys for the ordinary
 annual services of the Government shall deal only with such appropriation.
 62. The House of Assembly shall not originate or pass any vote,
 resolution, address or Bill for the appropriation of any part of the public
 
 South Africa
 
 825
 
 
 revenue or of any tax or impost to any purpose unless such appropriation
 has been recommended by message from the State President during the
 session in which such vote, resolution, address or Bill is proposed.
 63. (1) If the House of Assembly in any session passes a Bill imposing
 taxation only or dealing with the appropriation of revenue or moneys for
 the services of the Government, and the Senate in the same session rejects
 or fails to pass it, the Bill shall, unless the House of Assembly other wise
 directs, be presented to the State President for his assent and shall as
 soon as it has been assented to by the State President become an Act
 of Parliament and be taken to have been duly passed by the Senate and
 by the House of Assembly notwithstanding that the Senate has not
 consented to it.
 (2) There shall be endorsed on every Bill which imposes taxation only
 or which deals with the appropriation of revenue or moneys for the
 services of the Government, when it is sent up to the Senate and when it
 is presented to the State President for his assent, the certificate of the
 Speaker of the House of Assembly signed by him that it is such a Bill.
 (3) If the House of Assembly in two successive sessions (whether of the
 same Parliament or not) passes a Bill, other than a Bill referred .to in
 sub-section (1), and the Senate in each of those sessions rejects or fails
 to pass it or passes it with amendments to which the House of Assembly
 will not agree, the Bill shall, unless the House of Assembly otherwise
 directs, be presented to the State President for his assent, and shall as
 soon as it has been assented to by the State President become an Act of
 Parliament and be taken to have been duly passed by the Senate and by
 the House of Assembly, notwithstanding that the Senate has not consented
 to it, provided those sessions were not held in the same calendar year.
 (4) When a Bill is presented to the State President for his assent in
 terms of sub-section (3), there shall be endorsed on the Bill the certificate
 of the Speaker of the House of Assembly signed by him that the provisions
 of this section have been duly complied with in relation to that Bill.
 (5) A Bill shall be deemed to be the same Bill as a former Bill sent
 up to the Senate in the preceding session if, when it is sent up to the
 Senate, it is identical with the former Bill or contains only such alterations
 as are certified by the Speaker of the House of Assembly to be necessary
 owing to the time which has elapsed since the date of the former Bill,
 or to represent any amendments which have been made by the Senate in the
 former Bill in the preceding session, and any amendments which are
 certified by the Speaker to have been made by the Senate in the second
 session and agreed to by the House of Assembly, shall be inserted in the
 Bill as presented to the State President for his assent in terms of this
 section: Provided that the House of Assembly may, if it thinks fit, on the
 passage of such a Bill through the House of Assembly in the second
 session, suggest any further amendments without inserting the amend-
 
 826
 
 South Africa
 
 
 ments in the Bill, and any such suggested amendments shall be con-
 sidered by the Senate, and, if agreed to by the Senate, shall be regarded
 as amendments made by the Senate and agreed to by the House of
 Assembly, but the exercise of this power by the House of Assembly shall
 not affect the operation of this section in the event of the Bill being
 rejected by the Senate.
 (6) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to such a
 Bill as is referred to in section one hundred and eighteen.
 64. (1) When a Bill is presented to the State President for his assent,
 he shall declare according to his discretion, but subject to the provisions
 of this Act, that he assents thereto or that he withholds assent.
 (2) The State President may return to the Senate or the House of
 Assembly, in whichever it may have originated any Bill so presented
 to him, and may transmit therewith any amendments which he may
 recommend, and the Senate or the House of Assembly, as the case may
 be, may deal with the recommendation.
 65. As soon as may be after any law has been assented to by the State
 President, the Secretary to the House of Assembly shall cause two fair
 copies of such law, one being in the English and the other in the Afrikaans
 language (one of which copies shall have been signed by the State Presi-
 dent), to be enrolled of record in the office of the Registrar of the Appellate
 Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa, and such copies shall be
 conclusive evidence as to the provisions of every such law, and in case
 of conflict between the two copies so enrolled that signed by the State
 President shall prevail.
 PART VI
 THE PROVINCES
 Administrators
 66. (1) In each province there shall be a chief executive officer ap-
 pointed by the State President who shall be known as the administrator
 of the province, and in whose name all executive acts relating to pro-
 vincial affairs therein shall be done.
 (2) In the appointment of the administrator of any province, the State
 President shall as far as practicable give preference to persons resident
 in such province.
 (3) An administrator shall hold office for a period of five years and
 shall not be removed from office before the expiration thereof except
 by the State President for cause assigned which shall be communicated
 by message to the Senate and to the House of Assembly within one week
 after the removal, if Parliament is in session, or, if Parliament is not in
 
 South Africa
 
 827
 
 
 session, within one week after the commencement of the next ensuing
 session.
 (4) The State President may from time to time appoint a deputy-
 administrator to execute the office and functions of the administrator
 during his absence or illness or whenever for any reason he is unable to
 perform the duties of his office, or while the appointment of an adminis-
 trator for the province concerned is pending.
 67. The salaries of the administrators shall be fixed and provided by
 Parliament, and shall not be reduced during their respective terms of
 office.
 Provincial Councils
 68. (1) There shall be a provincial council in each province consisting,
 subject to the provisions of the Separate Representation of Voters Act,
 1951 (Act No. 46 of 1951), of the same number of members as are elected
 in the province for the House of Assembly under this Act: Provided that,
 in any province whose representatives in the House of Assembly are less
 than twenty-five in number, the provincial council shall consist of twenty-
 five members.
 (2) Any person qualified to vote for the election of members of a
 provincial council under this Act shall be qualified to be a member of
 such council under this Act.
 (3) Any provincial council constituted as provided in section seventy
 of the South Africa Act, 1909, and in existence immediately prior to the
 commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been duly constituted
 as provided in this Act.
 69. (1) The members of a provincial council under this Act shall be
 elected by the persons qualified to vote for the election of members of the
 House of Assembly in the province voting in the same electoral divisions
 as are delimited for the election of members of the House of Assembly
 under this Act: Provided that, in any province in which less than twenty-
 five members are elected to the House of Assembly, the delimitation of
 the electoral divisions, and any necessary re-allocation of members
 or adjustment of electoral divisions shall be effected by the same com-
 mission and on the same principles as are prescribed in regard to the
 electoral divisions of the House of Assembly.
 (2) Any alteration in the number of members of the provincial council,
 and any re-division of the province into electoral divisions, shall come
 into operation at the next general election for such council held after the
 completion of such re-division or of any allocation consequent upon
 such alteration, and not earlier.
 (3) The election shall take place at such times as the administrator
 shall by proclamation in the Official Gazette of the province direct, and
 
 South Africa
 
 828
 
 
 the provisions of section forty-one applicable to the election of members
 of the House of Assembly shall mutatis mutandis apply to such election.
 (4) Any person who immediately prior to the commencement of this
 Act holds office as a member of a provincial council by virtue of an
 election held as provided in section seventy-one of the South Africa Act,
 1909, shall be deemed to have been elected to the corresponding provincial
 council established by this Act.
 70. (1) The provisions of sections fifty-five, fifty-six and fifty-seven,
 relative to members of the House of Assembly, shall mutatis mutandis
 apply to members of the provincial councils.
 (2) Any member of a provincial council who becomes a member of the
 Senate or the House of Assembly, shall cease to be a member of such
 provincial council.
 71. (1) A provincial council shall continue for five years from the date
 of its first meeting, and shall not be subject to dissolution save by effluxion
 of time.
 (2) The provisions of section fifty-three relating to the tenure of office
 of the members and the functioning of the Senate or the House of Assembly
 upon a dissolution thereof, and to the summoning of Parliament after the
 Senate or the House of Assembly has been dissolved, shall mutatis mutandis
 apply with reference to a dissolution and summoning of any provincial
 council.
 72. (1) The administrator of a province shall be proclamation in the
 Official Gazette of that province fix such times for holding the sessions
 of the provincial council of that province as he may think fit, and may
 from time to time prorogue such council: Provided that there shall be a
 session of every provincial council once at least in every year so that a
 period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of the
 council in one session and its first sitting in the next session.
 (2) If immediately before the commencement of this Act any provincial
 council constituted under the South Africa Act, 1909, is in session by
 virtue of a proclamation issued under section seventy-four of that Act,
 that session shall be resumed from a date after such commencement to be
 determined before such commencement by resolution of that council
 in the same manner as if it were a session of the corresponding provincial
 council established by this Act for the holding of which the time had been
 duly fixed in terms of this Act.
 73. (1) The provincial council shall elect from among its members a
 chairman, and may make rules for the conduct of its proceedings.
 (2) Rules made under sub-section (1) shall be transmitted by the
 administrator to the State President, and shall have full force and effect
 unless and until the State President expresses his disapproval thereof
 in writing addressed to the administrator.
 74. The members of the provincial council shall receive such allowances
 as shall be determined by the State President.
 
 South Africa
 
 829
 
 
 75. There shall be freedom of speech in the provincial council and no
 administrat6r or any other member of the executive committee of a
 province and no member of the provincial council shall be liable to any
 civil or criminal proceedings, arrest, imprisonment or damages by reason
 of any matter or thing which he may have brought by petition, draft
 ordinance, resolution, motion or otherwise, or have said before the pro-
 vincial council, or by reason of his vote in such council.
 Executive Committees
 76. (1) Each provincial council shall at its first meeting after any
 general election elect from among its members, or otherwise, four persons
 to form with the administrator, who shall be chairman, an executive
 committee for the province.
 (2) The members of the executive committee other than the adminis-
 trator shall hold office until the election of their successors in the same
 manner.
 (3) The members so elected shall receive such remuneration as the
 provincial council, with the approval of the State President shall determine.
 (4) (a) A member of the provincial council shall not be disqualified
 from sitting as a member by reason of his having been elected as a
 member of the executive committee, and a member of the executive
 committee shall not be disqualified from being elected as a member
 of the provincial council, or from being appointed as a deputy-
 administrator under the provisions of sub-section (4) of section
 sixty-six.
 (b) A member of the executive committee who is appointed as a
 deputy-administrator under the provisions of sub-section (4) of
 section sixty-six shall as from the termination of such appointment
 resume his office and functions as a member of such executive
 committee unless his successor has in the meantime been elected
 under the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section.
 (5) Any casual vacancy arising in the executive committee shall be
 filled by election by the provincial council if in session, or, if the council
 is not in session, by a person appointed by the executive committee to
 hold office temporarily pending an election by the council.
 77. (1) The election of members of the executive committee of a
 province as provided in this Act shall, whenever such election is contested,
 be according to the principle of proportional representation, each voter
 having one transferable vote.
 (2) The State President shall make regulations in regard to the election
 of members of the executive committee of a province, including regulations
 prescribing the method of voting and of transferring and counting votes
 and the duties of returning officers in connection therewith.
 
 830
 
 South Africa
 
 
 78. The administrator and any other member of the executive com-
 mittee of a province, not being. a member of the provincial council,
 shall have the right to take part in the proceedings of the council, but
 shall not have the right to vote: Provided that a member of the executive
 committee who is a member of the provincial council, and who is ap-
 pointed as a deputy-administrator under the provisions of sub-section (4)
 of section sixty-six, shall during the period of his appointment retain the
 right to vote as a member of the provincial council.
 79. (1) The executive committee shall on behalf of the provincial
 council carry on the administration of provincial affairs.
 (2) Whenever there are not sufficient members of the executive com-
 mittee to form a quorum according to the rules of the committee, the
 administrator shall as soon as practicable convene a meeting of the
 provincial council for the purpose of electing members to fill the vacancies,
 and until such election the administrator shall carry on the administration
 of provincial affairs.
 80. Subject to the provisions of this Act, all powers, authorities and
 functions which immediately prior to the commencement of this Act
 were vested in or exercised by the executive committee of a province in
 terms of the South Africa Act, 1909, shall as far as the same continue in
 existence and are capable of being exercised after the commencement of
 this Act, be vested in the corresponding executive committee established
 under this Act.
 81. (1) Questions arising in the executive committee shall be determined
 by a majority of votes of the members present, and, in case of an equality
 of votes, the administrator shall have also a casting vote.
 (2) Subject to the approval of the State President, the executive com-
 mittee may make rules for the conduct of its proceedings.
 82. Subject to the provisions of any law passed by Parliament regulating
 the conditions of appointment, tenure of office, retirement and super-
 annuation of public officers, the executive committee shall have power to
 appoint sueb officers as may be necessary, in addition to officers assigned
 to the province by the State President under the provisions of this Act, to
 carry out the services entrusted to it and to make and enforce regulations
 for the organization and discipline of such officers.
 83. In regard to all matters in respect of which no powers are reserved
 or delegated to the provincial council, the administrator shall act on
 behalf of the State President when required to do so, and in such matters
 the administrator may act without reference to the other members of the
 executive committee.
 Powers of Provincial Councils
 84. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Financial Relations
 
 South Africa
 
 831
 
 
 Consolidation and Amendment Act, 1945 (Act No. 38 of 1945), and the
 assent of the State President as hereinafter provided, a provincial
 council may make ordinances in relation to matters coming within the
 following classes of subjects, namely:
 (a) direct taxation within the province in order to raise revenue for
 provincial purposes;
 (b) the borrowing of money on the sole credit of the province with
 the consent of the State President and in accordance with regulations
 framed by Parliament;
 (c) education, other than higher education and Bantu education,
 until Parliament otherwise provides;
 (d) agriculture to the extent and subject to the conditions defined
 by Parliament;
 (e) the establishment, maintenance and management of hospitals
 and charitable institutions;
 (f) (i) municipal institutions, divisional councils and other local
 institutions of a similar nature;
 (ii) any institutions or bodies other than such institutions as
 are referred to in sub-paragraph (i), which have in respect of
 any one or more areas (whether contiguous or not) situated outside
 the area of jurisdiction of any such institution as is referred to in
 sub-paragraph (i), authority and functions similar to the authority
 and functions of such institutions as are referred to in the said
 sub-paragraph, or authority and functions in respect of the pre-
 servation of public health in any such area or areas, including
 any such body as is referred to in section seven of the Public
 Health Act, 1919 (Act No. 36 of 1919);
 (g) local works and undertakings within the province, other than
 railways and harbors, and other than such works as extend beyond
 the borders of the province and subject to the power of Parliament
 to declare any work a national work and to provide for its con-
 struction by arrangement with the provincial council or otherwise;
 (h) roads, outspans, ponts and bridges, other than bridges con-
 necting two provinces;
 (i) markets and pounds;
 (j) fish and game preservation, subject to the provisions of section
 fourteen of the Sea Fisheries Act, 1940 (Act No. 10 of 1940);
 (k) the imposition of punishment by fine or imprisonment for
 enforcing any law or any ordinance of the province made in relation
 to any matter coming within any of the classes of subjects enumerated
 in this section;
 (1) generally all matters which, in the opinion of the State President
 are of a merely local or private nature in the province;
 (m) all other subjects in respect of which Parliament may by law
 
 832
 
 South Africa
 
 
 delegate the power of making ordinances to the provincial council.
 (2) An ordinance passed by a provincial council in relation to any
 matter referred to in paragraph (f) of sub-section (1), may provide for the
 appointment by the administrator of the province concerned, or any
 specified authority, of the members or any number of the members of
 any institution or body referred to in the said paragraph.
 (3) The provisions of sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of section twenty-four
 shall mutatis mutandis apply with reference to a provincial council, as
 if a reference therein to Parliament or the Senate or the House of Assembly
 were a reference to a provincial Council, and as if a reference therein to an
 Act of Parliament were a reference to an ordinance of a provincial council
 and a reference to a Bill which has been brought before the Senate or the
 House of Assembly were a reference to a draft ordinance which is before
 such a council.
 85. Any ordinance made by a provincial council shall have effect in
 and for the province as long and as far only as it is not repugnant to any
 Act of Parliament.
 86. A provincial council may recommend to Parliament the passing
 of any law relating to any matter in respect of which such council is not
 competent to make ordinances.
 87. In regard to any matter which requires to be dealt with by means
 of a private Act of Parliament, the provincial council of the province to
 which the matter relates may, subject to such procedure as may be
 prescribed by Parliament, take evidence by means of a select committee
 or otherwise for and against the passing of such law, and, upon receipt
 of a report from such council, together with the evidence upon which
 it is founded, Parliament may pass such Act without further evidence
 being taken in support thereof.
 88. (1) (a) There shall be a provincial revenue fund in every province,
 into which shall be paid all revenues raised by or accruing to the
 provincial council and all moneys paid over by the State President
 to the provincial council.
 (b) The provincial revenue fund shall be appropriated by the
 provincial council by ordinance for the purposes of the provincial
 administration generally, or, in the case of moneys paid over by the
 State President for particular purposes, then for such purposes,
 but no such ordinance shall be passed by the provincial council
 unless the administrator has first recommended to the council to
 make provision for the specific service for which the appropriation
 is to be made.
 (c) No money shall be issued from the provincial revenue fund except
 in accordance with such appropriation and under warrant signed
 by the administrator.
 (2) The State President may make regulations for the provinces
 
 South Africa
 
 833
 
 
 prescribing:
 (a) the form of estimates required for presentation to the provincial
 council;
 (b) the system which shall be observed for:
 (i) the collection, receipt, banking, custody, issue, expenditure,
 care and management of provincial moneys as defined in para-
 graph (b) of subsection (4) of section ninety-one; and
 (ii) the control of stores;
 (c) the officers or other persons who shall receive, hold, issue,
 account for, manage or otherwise deal with such provincial moneys,
 stores, stamps or securities, and the duties and responsibilities of
 such officers or persons,
 and generally for the better administration of the provincial revenue fund.
 (3) The administrator of a province may, subject to the laws relating
 to education, authorize every educational institution in the province which
 is specified in a list published by the State President by proclamation in
 the Gazette, to retain and apply such of its revenues and other moneys
 received by it, as the administrator may from time to time determine,
 for the purpose of meeting its expenditure, and such revenues and other
 moneys shall, not withstanding the provisions of sub-section (1), not be
 paid into the provincial revenue fund, but shall be accounted for and
 dealt with as the administrator may prescribe.
 89. (1) When a proposed ordinance has been passed by a provincial
 council it shall be presented by the administrator to the State President
 for his assent.
 (2) The State President shall declare within one month from     the
 presentation to him of the proposed ordinance that he assents thereto,
 or that he withholds assent, or that he reserves the proposed ordinance
 for further consideration.
 (3) A proposed ordinance so reserved shall not have any force unless
 and until, within one year from the day on which it was presented to the
 State President he makes known by proclamation in the Gazette that it
 has received his assent.
 90. (1) An ordinance assented to by the State President and pro-
 mulgated by the administrator shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,
 have the force of law within the province.
 (2) The administrator shall cause two fair copies of every such ordinance,
 one being in the English and the other in the Afrikaans language (one of
 which copies shall have been signed by the State President), to be enrolled
 of record in the office of the Registrar of the Appellate Division of the
 Supreme Court of South Africa, and such copies shall be conclusive
 evidence as to the provisions of such ordinance, and, in case of conflict
 between the two copies so enrolled, that signed by the State President
 shall prevail.
 
 South Africa
 
 834
 
 
 South Africa
 
 Miscellaneous
 91. (1) In each province there shall be an auditor of accounts appointed
 in accordance with the laws governing the public service.
 (2) The salary and any allowances of any such auditor shall be paid
 out of moneys appropriated by Parliament for the purpose.
 (3) Any such auditor shall examine and audit the accounts of the
 province to which he is assigned subject to such regulations and orders
 as may be framed by the State President and approved by Parliament,
 and no warrant signed by the administrator authorizing the issuing of
 money shall have effect unless countersigned by such auditor.
 (4) (a) If any person who is or was in the employment of a province:
 (i) has failed to collect any moneys owing to that province for the
 collection of which he is or was responsible; or
 (ii) is or was responsible for any improper payment of provincial
 moneys or for any payment of such moneys which is not duly
 vouched; or
 (iii) is or was responsible for any deficiency in, or for the de-
 struction of or any damage to, any provincial moneys, stamps,
 securities, stores or other property of a province; or
 (iv) has caused a province any loss by a failure to carry out a
 specific duty,
 and a proper explanation is not, within a period specified by an
 auditor referred to in sub-section (1), furnished to such auditor with
 regard to such failure to collect, improper payment, payment not
 duly vouched, deficiency, destruction, damage or failure to carry
 out a duty, that auditor may surcharge against the said person the
 amount not collected or the amount of such payment, deficiency,
 damage or loss or the value of the property destroyed,. as the case
 may be, or such lesser amount. or value as he may in the circum-
 stances of the case deem fit, and the amount of any such surcharge
 shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), be a debt due from
 the person against whom the surcharge is made.
 (b) For the purposes of paragraph (a) "provincial moneys" shall
 include all revenues and moneys . referred to in subsection (1) of
 section eighty-eight and all other moneys whatsoever received or
 held by, for or on account of a province.
 (5) The auditor making any such surcharge shall notify the adminis-
 trator concerned of that surcharge, and such administrator shall, subject
 to the provisions of sub-section (8), recover the amount thereof from the
 person liable to pay the same: Provided that, unless the administrator
 otherwise directs, the amount of any such surcharge which is due from
 a person in the employment of a province shall be recovered in equal
 
 835
 
 
 monthly instalments by deductions from his monthly salary not exceeding
 one-fourth of such salary.
 (6) The amount of any such surcharge may be recovered by the ad-
 ministrator concerned by action in any competent court, and in the event
 of any such action being instituted against a person referred to in the
 proviso to sub-section (5) that proviso shall not apply.
 (7) The auditor concerned may at any time withdraw a surcharge
 in respect of which a satisfactory explanation has been received or if it
 otherwise appears that no surcharge should have been made, and shall
 at once notify the administrator concerned of any such withdrawal of
 surcharge.
 (8) (a) Any person who is dissatisfied with any surcharge made
 against him by an auditor may, within a period of one month after
 he has been notified by such auditor of the surcharge, or within
 such further period as the administrator concerned may allow, appeal
 to that administrator and, after such further investigation as may be
 considered necessary, that administrator may make such order
 directing that the appellant be released wholly or in part from the
 surcharge as may appear to be just and reasonable.
 (b) The auditor concerned shall be informed of every such order.
 (c) The administrator concerned shall present a complete list of all
 surcharges remitted in whole or in part in accordance with the pro-
 visions of this sub-section, to the provincial council as soon as
 possible if the council is in session, or if the council is not in session,
 within seven days after the commencement of its next ensuing session.
 (9) Any person against whom a surcharge has been raised, may, instead
 of appealing to the administrator concerned under paragraph (a) of sub-
 section (8), apply to any court of competent jurisdiction within a period
 of one month after he has been notified in writing by the auditor concerned
 of the surcharge, or within such further period as the court may allow,
 for an order setting aside or reducing the surcharge, and such court may
 on any such application, if not satisfied by that auditor on the merits
 of the case that the surcharge was rightly imposed, or as to the correctness
 of the amount thereof, make an order setting aside the, surcharge or
 reducing it, as the case may be.
 92. Notwithstanding anything in this Act contained, all powers,
 authorities and functions lawfully exercised at the commencement- of this
 Act by divisional or municipal councils, or any other duly constituted
 local authority or body contemplated in paragraph (vi) of section eighty-
 five of the South Africa Act, 1909, shall be and remain in force until
 varied or withdrawn by Parliament or by a provincial council having
 power in that behalf.
 93. The seats of provincial government shall be:
 For the Cape of Good Hope ...................      Cape Town.
 
 836
 
 South Africa
 
 
 For Natal .................................Pietermaritzburg.
 For the Transvaal ...........................Pretoria.
 For the Orange Free State ....................Bloemfontein.
 PART VII
 ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE
 94. (1) The judicial authority of the Republic shall be vested in a
 Supreme Court to be known as the Supreme Court of South Africa and
 consisting of an Appellate Division and such provincial and local divisions
 as may be prescribed by law.
 (2) The said Supreme Court shall, subject to the provisions of section
 fifty-nine, have jurisdiction as provided in the Supreme Court Act, 1959.
 (3) Save as otherwise provided in the Supreme Court Act, 1959, Bloem-
 fontein shall be the seat of the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court
 of South Africa.
 95. All administrative powers, functions and duties affecting the
 administration of justice shall be under the control of the Minister of
 Justice.
 PART VIII
 FINANCE AND RAILWAYS
 96. Nothing in this Act contained shall affect any assets or rights
 belonging to the State or any debts or liabilities of the State as existing
 immediately prior to the commencement of this Act, and all such assets,
 rights, debts and liabilities shall remain assets, rights, debts and liabilities
 of the Republic, subject, not withstanding any other provisions contained
 in this Act, to the conditions imposed by any law under which such
 debts or liabilities were raised or incurred, and without prejudice to
 any rights of security of priority in respect of the payment of principal,
 interest, sinking fund and other charges conferred on the creditors
 concerned, and may, subject to such conditions and rights, convert,
 renew or consolidate such debts.
 97. All revenues of the Republic, from whatever source arising, shall
 vest in the State President.
 98. There shall be a Consolidated Revenue Fund into which shall be
 paid all revenues raised or received by the State President, other than
 the revenues referred to in section ninety-nine, and such fund shall be
 appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the Republic in the manner
 prescribed by this Act, and subject to the charges imposed thereby.
 99. There shall be a Railway and Harbor Fund into which shall be
 
 South Africa
 
 837
 
 
 paid all revenues raised or received by the State President from the
 administration of the railways, ports and harbors, and such fund shall
 be appropriated by Parliament for the purposes of the railways, ports
 and harbors in the manner prescribed by this Act.
 100. No money shall, subject to the provisions of the Exchequer and
 Audit Act, 1956 (Act No. 23 of 1956), be withdrawn from the Consolidated
 Revenue Fund or the Railway and Harbor Fund, except under appropri-
 ation made by law.
 101. The annual interest of the public debts of the Colonies incorporated
 in the Union of South Africa in terms of the South Africa Act, 1909,
 and any sinking funds constituted by law at the establishment of the
 Republic, shall form a first charge on the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
 102. (1) The Railways and Harbors Board referred to in section one
 of the Railway Board Act, 1916 (Act No. 17 of 1916), hereinafter referred
 to as the board, shall consist of not more than three commissioners, who
 shall be appointed by the State President, and a Minister, who shall be
 chairman.
 (2) A commissioner shall hold office for a period of five years, but may
 be re-appointed.
 (3) A commissioner shall not be removed before the expiration of his
 period of appointment, except by the State President for cause assigned,
 which shall be communicated by message to the Senate and to the House
 of Assembly within one week after the removal, if Parliament is in session
 or, if Parliament is not in session, within one week after the commence-
 ment of the next ensuing session.
 (4) The salaries of the commissioners shall be fixed by Parliament and
 shall not be reduced during their respective terms of office.
 103. (1) The Railways, ports and harbors of the Republic shall be
 administered on business principles, due regard being had to agricultural
 and industrial development within the Republic and the promotion, by
 means of cheap transport, of the settlement of an agricultural and in-
 dustrial population in the inland portions of all provinces.
 (2) (a) So far as may be, the total earnings of the railways, ports
 and harbors shall be not more than are sufficient to meet the neces-
 sary outlays for working, maintenance, betterment, depreciation
 and the payment of interest due on capital not being capital con-
 tributed out of railway or harbor revenue, and not including any
 sums payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund in accordance
 with the provisions of sections one hundred and five and one hundred
 and six.
 (b) The amount of interest due on such capital invested shall be
 paid over from the Railway and Harbor Fund into the Consolidated
 Revenue Fund.
 104. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section
 
 838
 
 South Africa
 
 
 one hundred and three, the board may establish a fund out of railway and
 harbor revenue to be used for maintaining, as far as may be, uniformity
 of rates notwithstanding fluctuations in traffic.
 105. (1) Save as provided in paragraph (6) of section two of the Railways
 and Harbors Control and Management (Consolidation )Act, 1957 (Act
 No. 70 of 1957), no railway for the conveyance of public traffic, and no
 port, harbor or similar work, shall be constructed without the sanction
 of Parliament.
 (2) Every proposal for the construction of any port or harbor works
 or of any line of railway, shall, before being submitted to Parliament, be
 considered by the board, which shall report thereon, and shall advise
 whether the proposed works or line of railway should or should not be
 constructed.
 (3) (a) If any such works or line is constructed contrary to the advice
 of the board, and if the board is of opinion that the revenue derived
 from the operation of such works or line will be insufficient to meet
 the costs of working and maintenance, and of interest on the capital
 invested therein, it shall frame an estimate of the annual loss which,
 in its opinion, will result from such operation.
 (b) Such estimate shall be examined by the Controller and Auditor-
 General, and when approved by him, the amount thereof shall be
 paid over annually from the Consolidated Revenue Fund to the Rail-
 way and Harbor Fund: Provided that, if in any year the actual loss
 incurred, as calculated by the board and certified by the Controller
 and Auditor-General, is less than the estimate framed by the board,
 the amount paid over in respect of that year shall be reduced ac-
 cordingly so as not to exceed the actual loss incurred.
 (c) In calculating the loss arising from the operation of any such
 work or line, the board shall have regard to the value of any con.
 tributions of traffic to other parts of the system which may be due
 to the operation of such work or line.
 106. If the board is required by the State President or under any
 Act of Parliament or resolution of the Senate and of the House of Assembly
 to provide any services or facilities either gratuitously or at a tariff which
 is insufficient to meet the costs involved in the provision of such services
 or facilities, the board shall at the end of each financial year present to
 Parliament an account approved by the Controller and Auditor-General,
 showing, as nearly as can be ascertained, the amount of the loss incurred
 by reason of the provision of such services or facilities, and such amount
 shall be paid out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund to the Railway and
 Harbor Fund.
 
 South Africa
 
 839
 
 
 South Africa
 
 PART IX
 GENERAL
 107. Subject to the provisions of this Act, all laws which were in force
 in any part of the Union of South Africa, or in any territory in respect
 of which Parliament is competent to legislate, immediately prior to the
 commencement of this Act, shall continue in force until repealed or
 amended by the competent authority.
 108. (1) English and Afrikaans shall be the official languages of the
 Republic, and shall be treated on a footing of equality, and possess and
 enjoy equal freedom, rights and privileges.
 (2) All records, journals and proceedings of Parliament shall be kept
 in both the official languages, and all Bills, Acts and notices of general
 public importance or interest issued by the Government of the Republic
 shall be in both the official languages.
 109. All records, journals and proceedings of a provincial council shall
 be kept in both the official languages, and all draft ordinances, ordinances
 and notices of public importance or interest issued by a provincial ad-
 ministration, and all notices issued and all regulations or by-laws made
 by any institution or body contemplated in paragraph (f) of sub-section (1)
 of section eighty-four, shall be in both the official languages.
 110. Whenever anything is published in a newspaper at the instance
 of the State or by or under the directions of any body referred to in
 paragraph (f) of sub-section (1) of section eighty-four or of the adminis-
 tration of a province, the publication shall take place simultaneously
 in both official languages and in the case of each language in a newspaper
 circulating in the area of jurisdiction of the authority concerned which
 appears mainly in that language, and the publication in each language
 shall as far as practicable occupy the same amount of space: Provided
 that where in the area in question any newspaper appears substantially
 in both of the official languages, publication in both languages may take
 place in that newspaper.
 111. The control and administration of Bantu affairs and of matters
 specially or differentially affecting Asiatics throughout the Republic
 shall vest in the State President, who shall exercise all those special powers
 in regard to Bantu administration which immediately prior to the com-
 mencement of this Act were vested in the Governor-General-in-Council
 of the Union of South Africa, and any lands which immediately prior
 to such commencement vested in the said Governor-General-in-Council
 for the purpose of reserves for Bantu locations shall vest in the State
 President, who shall exercise all such special powers in relation to such
 reserves as may have been exercisable by the said Governor-General-in-
 
 840
 
 
 Council, and no lands which were set aside for the occupation of Bantu
 and which could not at the establishment of the Union of South Africa
 have been alienated except by an Act of the Legislature of a colony
 which was incorporated in the Union of South Africa in terms of the
 South Africa Act, 1909, shall be alienated or in any way diverted from the
 purposes for which they were set aside except under the authority of an
 Act of Parliament.
 112. All rights and obligations under conventions, treaties or agree-
 ments which were binding on any of the Colonies incorporated in the
 Union of South Africa at its establishment, and were still binding on the
 Union immediately prior to the commencement of this Act, shall be
 rights and obligations of the Republic, just as all other rights and obliga-
 tions under conventions, treaties or agreements which immediately prior
 to the commencement of this Act were binding on the Union.
 113. All powers, authorities and functions which immediately prior
 to the commencement of this Act were in any of the provinces vested in the
 Governor-General or in the Governor-General-in-Council or in any auth-
 ority of the province, shall as far as the same continue in existence and
 are capable of being exercised after the commencement of this Act, be
 vested in the State President, or in the authority exercising similar
 powers under the Republic, as the case may be, except such powers,
 authorities and functions as are by this Act or any other law vested in
 some other authority.
 114. Parliament shall not:
 (a) alter the boundaries of any province, divide a province into two
 or more provinces, or form a new province out of provinces within
 the Republic, except on the petition of the provincial council of
 every province whose boundaries are affected thereby;
 (b) abolish any provincial council or abridge the powers conferred
 on provincial councils under section eighty-four, except by petition
 to Parliament by the provincial council concerned.
 115. Any person who is in terms of any provision of this Act required
 to make and subscribe an oath of office may in lieu of such oath make and
 subscribe a solemn affirmation in corresponding form.
 116. (1) (a) All criminal proceedings which immediately prior to the
 commencement of this Act were required to be instituted in the name
 of the Queen shall be instituted in the name of the Republic.
 (b) Any such proceedings which have not been concluded before the
 commencement of this Act, or which, having been so concluded,
 are thereafter reopened, shall be continued in all respects as if this
 Act had not been passed, except that the proceedings shall thereafter
 be conducted as if they were instituted in the name of the Republic.
 (2) Any civil proceedings instituted prior to the commencement of
 this Act by or against a Minister as representing the Government of the
 
 South Africa
 
 841
 
 
 Union of South Africa or by or against an administrator of a province
 appointed under the South Africa Act, 1909, which have not been disposed
 of before such commencement, or, having been so disposed of, are there-
 after reopened, may be proceeded with without interruption by or against
 that Minister as representing the Government of the Republic or by or
 against the said administrator in his capacity as the person appointed as
 the administrator of the province concerned under this Act.
 (8) Any provision of any law in terms of which any person is required
 to take an oath or solemn affirmation of allegiance to the King or the
 Queen, shall be construed as a provision requiring such person to take
 an oath or solemn affirmation that he will be faithful to the Republic.
 (4) Any person who holds an office in the service of the State in respect
 of which he has prior to the commencement of this Act taken an oath
 or solemn affirmation of allegiance to the King or the Queen, shall,
 if required to do so on the direction of the State President, take an oath
 or solemn affirmation that he will be faithful to the Republic.
 117. (1) References in any law:
 (a) to any House or the Houses of Parliament, shall be construed
 as references to the Senate or the House of Assembly or both the
 Senate and the House of Assembly, as the context may require;
 (b) to the Clerk or the Clerk-Assistant of the Senate or the House
 of Assembly, shall be construed as references to the Secretary and
 the Deputy Secretary respectively to the Senate or the House of
 Assembly.
 (2) Any person holding office immediately before the commencement
 of this Act as the Clerk or the Clerk-Assistant of the Senate or the House
 of Assembly shall be deemed to have been duly appointed as Secretary
 or Deputy Secretary respectively to the Senate or the House of Assembly.
 118. (1) Parliament may by law repeal or alter any of the provisions
 of this Act: Provided that no repeal or alteration of the provisions con-
 tained in this section or in section one hundred and eight shall be valid
 unless the Bill embodying such repeal or alteration is passed by the Senate
 and the House of Assembly sitting together, and at the third reading is
 agreed to by not less than two-thirds of the total number of members of
 the Senate and the House of Assembly.
 (2) A Bill passed as aforesaid at such joint sitting shall be taken to
 have been duly passed by the Senate and by the House of Assembly.
 119. In this Act, unless the context otherwise indicates:
 "Afrikaans" includes Dutch;
 "province" means any of the provinces incorporated in the Union of
 South Africa by the South Africa Act, 1909;
 "Republic" means the Republic of South Africa;
 120. (1) The laws specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed to
 the extent set out in the third column of the Schedule.
 
 842
 
 South Africa
 
 
 South Africa                          843
 (2) Any authority constituted or person appointed or power conferred
 or anything done in pursuance of powers conferred by or by virtue of any
 provision of any law repealed by sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have
 been constituted, appointed, conferred or done in pursuance of powers
 conferred by or by virtue of the corresponding provision of this Act.
 121. This Act shall be called the Republic of South Africa Constitution
 Act, 1961, and shall, save in so far as may be otherwise required for the
 purpose of giving effect to any provision thereof, come into operation on
 the thirty-first day of May, 1961.
 
 
</pre>
