<pre>
 Ghana
 
 THE CONSTITUTION1
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF GHANA
 July 1, 1960, as amended January 31, 1964
 We the People of Ghana, by our Representatives gathered in this our
 Constituent Assembly,
 In exercise of our undoubted right to appoint for ourselves the means
 whereby we shall be governed, .
 In sympathy with and loyalty to our fellow-countrymen of Africa.
 In the hope that we may by our actions this day help to further the
 development of a Union of African States, and
 In a spirit of friendship and peace with all other Peoples of the World,
 Do hereby enact and give to ourselves this Constitution.
 This Constitution is enacted on this twenty-ninth day of June, 1960
 and shall come into operation on the first day of July, 1960.
 PART I
 POWERS OF THE PEOPLE
 1. The powers of the State derive from the People, as the source of
 power and the guardians of the State, by whom certain of those powers
 are now conferred on the institutions established by this Constitution
 and who shall have the right to exercise the remainder of those powers,
 and to choose their representatives in the Parliament now established,
 in accordance with the following principle: that, without distinction of
 sex, race, religion or political belief, every person who, being by law a
 citizen of Ghana, has attained the age of twenty-one years and is not
 disqualified by law on grounds of absence, infirmity of mind or criminality,
 shall be entitled to one vote, to be cast in freedom and secrecy.
 1A. (1) In conformity with the interests, welfare and aspirations of
 the People, and in order to develop the organizational initiative and
 political activity of the People, there shall be one National Party which
 I Government Printer, Accra, GP/A 1031/5,000/3/63-64. Supplied by the Ministry
 of Foreign Affairs.
 
 213
 
 
 shall be the vanguard of the People in their struggle to build a socialist
 society and which shall be the leading core of all organizations of the People.
 (2) The National Party shall be the Convention People's Party.
 2. In the confident expectation of an early surrender of sovereignty
 to a union of African States and territories, the People now confer on
 Parliament the power to provide for the surrender of the whole or any
 part of the sovereignty of Ghana:
 Provided that the sovereignty of Ghana shall not be surrendered or
 diminished on any grounds other than the furtherance of African unity.
 3. With the exception of section (2) of Article 1A, the power to repeal
 or alter this Part of the Constitution is reserved to the People.
 PART II
 THE REPUBLIC
 4. (1) Ghana is a sovereign unitary Republic.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of Article Two of the Constitution, the
 power to provide a form of government for Ghana other than that of a
 republic or for the form of the Republic to be other than unitary is
 reserved to the People.
 5. Until otherwise provided by law, the territories of Ghana shall
 consist of those territories which were comprised in Ghana immediately
 before the coming into operation of the Constitution, including the terri-
 torial waters.
 6. Until otherwise provided by law, Ghana shall be divided into the
 following Regions, which shall respectively comprise such territories as
 may be provided for by law, that is to say, the Ashanti Region, the Brong-
 Ahafo Region, the Central Region, the Eastern Region,. the Northern
 Region, the Upper Region, the Volta Region, and the Western Region.
 7. The Flag of Ghana shall consist of three equal horizontal stripes,
 the upper stripe being red, the middle stripe white and the lower stripe
 green, with a black star in the centre of the white stripe.
 PART III
 THE PRESIDENT AND HIS MINISTERS
 Head of the State
 8. (1) There shall be a President of Ghana, who shall be the Head of the
 State and responsible to the People:
 (2) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the executive power
 of the State is conferred upon the President.
 
 214
 
 Ghana
 
 
 (3) The President shall be the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
 Forces and the Fount of Honour.
 (4) Except as may be otherwise provided by law, in the exercise of his
 functions the President shall act in his own discretion and shall not be
 obliged to follow advice tendered by any other person.
 (5) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 9. The term of office of the President shall begin with his assumption
 of office and end with the assumption of office of the person elected as
 President in the next following -election, so however that the President
 may at any time resign his office by instrument under his hand addressed
 to the Chief Justice.
 First President
 10. Kwame Nkrumah is hereby appointed first President of Ghana,
 having been chosen as such before the enactment of the Constitution in a
 Plebiscite conducted in accordance with the principle set out in Article
 One of the Constitution.
 Election of President and Assumption of Office
 11. (1) An election of a President shall be held whenever one of the
 following events occurs, that is to say:
 (a) the National Assembly is dissolved, or
 (b) the President dies, or
 (c) the President resigns his office.
 (2) Provision shall be made by law for regulating the election of a Presi-
 dent, and shall be so made in accordance with the following principles:
 (a) any citizen of Ghana shall be qualified for election as President
 if he has attained the age of thirty-five years;
 (b) the returning officer for the election shall be the Chief Justice;
 (c) if contested, an election held by reason of a dissolution of the
 National Assembly shall be decided by preferences given before the
 General Election by persons subsequently returned as Members of
 Parliament, or, if no candidate for election as President obtains
 more than one-half of the preferences so given, by secret ballot of
 the Members of the new Parliament;
 (d) if contested, an election held by reason of the death or resignation
 of the President shall be decided by secret ballot of the Members of
 Parliament.
 (3) If an election is to be decided by balloting among the Members of
 Parliament and a President has not been declared elected after five
 ballots the National Assembly shall be deemed to be dissolved at the
 conclusion of the fifth ballot.
 
 Ghana
 
 215
 
 
 (4) Where a person has been declared by the Chief Justice to be elected
 as President his election shall not be questioned in any court.
 12. (1) The President shall assume office by taking an oath in the
 following form, which shall be administered before the People by -the
 Chief Justice: "I . . . do solemnly swear that I will well and truly exercise
 the functions of the high office of President of Ghana, that'I will bear
 true faith and allegiance to Ghana, that I will preserve and defend the
 Constitution, and that I will do right to all manner of People according
 to law without fear or favor, affection or ill-will. So help me'God."
 (2) Instead of taking an oath the President may if he thinks 'fit make
 an affirmation, which shall be in the like form with the substitution
 of affirm for swear and the omission of the concluding sentence.
 13. (1) Immediately after his assumption of office the President shall
 make the following solemn declaration before the People: "On accepting
 the call of the People to the high office of President of i Ghana I . ..
 solemnly declare my adherence to the following fundamental principles:
 That the powers of Government spring from 'the will of the People and
 should be exercised in accordance therewith.
 That freedom and justice should be honored and maintained.
 That the union of. Africa should be striven for .by every lawful means
 and, when attained, should be faithfully preserved.
 That the Independence of Ghana should not be surrendered or diminish-
 ed on any grounds other than the furtherance of African unity.
 That no person should suffer discrimination on grounds of sex, race,
 tribe, religion or political belief.
 That Chieftaincy in Ghana should be guaranteed and preserved.
 That every citizen of Ghana should receive his fair share of the produce
 yielded by the development of the country.
 That subject to such restrictions as may be necessary for preserving
 public order, morality or health, no person: should be deprived of freedom
 of religion or speech, of the right to move and assemble without hindrance
 or of the right of access to courts of law.
 That no person should be deprived of his property save where the public
 interest so requires and the law so provides."
 (2) The power to repeal this Article, or to alter its provisions otherwise
 than by the addition of further paragraphs to the declaration, is reserved
 to the People.
 Official Seals
 14. There shall be a Public Seal and a Presidential Seal, the use and
 custody of which shall be regulated by law.
 
 216
 
 Ghana
 
 
 Ghana
 
 Ministers and Cabinet
 15. (1) The President shall from time to time appoint by instrument
 under the Presidential Seal persons from among the Members of Parliament, who shall be styled Ministers of Ghana, to assist him in his exercise
 of the executive power and to take charge under his direction of such
 departments of State as he may assign to them.
 (2) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 16. (1) There shall be a Cabinet consisting of the President and not
 less than eight Ministers of Ghana appointed as members of the Cabinet by the President.
 (2) Subject to the powers of the President, the Cabinet is charged with the general direction and control of the Government of Ghana.
 (3) The appointment of a, Minister as a member of the Cabinet may at
 any time be revoked by the President.
 (4) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 17. The office of a Minister of Ghana shall become vacant:
 (a) if the President removes him from office by instrument under the
 Presidential Seal; or
 (b) if he ceases to be a Member of Parliament otherwise than by reason of a dissolution; or
 (c) on the acceptance by the President of his resignation from office; or
 (d) immediately before the assumption of office of a President.
 Supplemental provisions as to President
 18. (1) There shall be a Presidential Commission consisting of three
 persons appointed by the President to execute the office of the President in accordance with advice tendered by the Cabinet in the event of:
 (a) the death or resignation of the President before the assumption
 of office of his successor; or
 (b) the illness of the President or his absence from Ghana during
 which he cannot conveniently perform the functions of his office; or
 (c) the President being adjudged incapable of acting:
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be taken to prejudice
 the power of the President, at any time when he is not adjudged
 incapable of acting, to delegate any exercise of the executive power to some other person.
 (2) A Presidential Commission may act by any two of its members.
 (3) The President may at any time revoke the appointment of any
 or all members of the Presidential Commission.
 (4) The President shall be deemed to be adjudged incapable of acting
 if the Speaker in pursuance of a resolution of the National Assembly:

 (a) has declared that, after considering medical evidence, the National Assembly is satisfied that the President is, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, unable to exercise the functions of his office, and
 (b) has not subsequently withdrawn the declaration on the ground
 that the President has recovered his capacity.
 19. (1) The President shall receive such salary and allowances, and
 on retirement such pension, gratuity and other allowance, as may be
 determined by the National Assembly.
 (2) The salary and allowances of the President shall not be reduced
 during his period of office.
 (3) Salaries and allowances payable under this Article are hereby
 charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 PART IV
 PARLIAMENT
 20. (1) There shall be a Parliament consisting of the President and the
 National Assembly.
 (2) So much of the legislative power of the State as is not reserved by
 the Constitution to the People is conferred on Parliament as the
 corporate representative of the People; and any portion of the remainder
 of the legislative power of the State may be conferred on Parliament at
 any future time by the decision of a majority of the electors voting in
 a referendum ordered by the President and conducted in accordance
 with the principle set out in Article One of the Constitution:
 Provided that the only power to alter the Constitution (whether
 expressly or by implication) which is or may as aforesaid be conferred
 on Parliament is a power to alter it by an Act expressed to be an Act
 to amend the Constitution and containing only provisions effecting
 the alteration thereof.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of Article Two of the Constitution,
 Parliament cannot divest itself of any of its legislative powers:
 Provided that if by any amendment to the Constitution the power to
 repeal or alter any existing or future provision of the Constitution is
 reserved to the People, section (2) of this Article shall apply in relation
 to that provision as if the power to repeal or alter it had originally
 been reserved to the People.
 (4) No Act passed in -exercise of a legislative power expressed by the
 Constitution to be reserved to the People shall take effect unless the
 Speaker has certified that power to pass the Act has been conferred on
 Parliament in the manner provided by section (2) of this Article; and a
 certificate so given shall be conclusive.
 (5) No person or body other than Parliament shall have power to
 
 218
 
 Ghana
 
 
 make provisions having the force of law except under authority con-
 ferred by Act of Parliament.
 (6) Apart from the limitations referred to in the preceding provisions
 of this Article, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be under no
 limitation whatsoever.
 (7) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 21. (1) The National Assembly shall consist of the Speaker and not less
 than one hundred and four Members, to be known as Members of Parliament.
 (2) The Members shall be elected in the manner provided by a law
 framed in accordance with the principle set out in Article One of the
 Constitution, and the Speaker shall be elected by the Members.
 (3) There shall be freedom of speech, debate and proceedings in the
 National Assembly and that freedom shall not be impeached. or
 questioned in any court or place out of the Assembly.
 (4) The President may attend any sitting of the National Assembly.
 (5) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 22. (1) There shall be a new session of the National Assembly once at
 least in every year, so that a period of twelve months shall not elapse
 between the last sitting of the Assembly in one session and the first sitting
 thereof in the next session.
 (2) The President may at any time by proclamation summon or pro-
 rogue the National Assembly.
 (8) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 23. (1) The President may. at any time by proclamation dissolve the
 National Assembly.
 (2) The President shall in any case dissolve the National Assembly on
 the expiration of the period of five years from the first sitting of the
 Assembly after the previous General Election.
 (3) If an emergency arises or exists when the National Assembly
 stands dissolved, the President may by proclamation summon an
 assembly of the persons who were Members of Parliament immediately
 before the dissolution and, until the majority of results have been
 declared in the General Election following the dissolution, the assembly
 shall be deemed to be the National Assembly.
 (4) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 24. (1) Every Bill passed by the National Assembly shall be presented
 to the President who shall:
 (a) signify his assent to the Bill, or
 (b) signify his assent to a part only of the Bill and his refusal of assent
 to the remainder, or
 (c) signify his refusal of assent to the Bill.
 (2) On the signifying by the President of his assent to a Bill passed by
 the National Assembly or to a part thereof, the Bill or that part thereof,
 as the case may be, shall become an Act of Parliament.
 
 Ghana
 
 219
 
 
 . 25.. (1) At the beginning of each session of the National Assembly
 the President shall deliver to the Members of Parliament an address
 indicating the policies proposed to be followed by the Government during
 that session.
 (2) At least seven days before each prorogation of the National Assembly
 the President shall delive to the Members of Parliament an address
 indicating the manner and results of the application of the policies of
 the Government during the preceding period and otherwise setting
 forth the state of the Nation.
 * (3) If circumstances render it impracticable for the President himself
 to deliver any such address, he may instead send a message to the
 National Assembly embodying the address.
 : (4) In addition to delivering any address or sending any message under
 the preceding provisions of this Article, the President may at any time
 deliver an address to the Members of Parliament or send a message; to
 the National Assembly.
 - (5) Every message sent by the President to the National Assembly
 shall be read to the Members of Parliament by a Minister.
 PART V
 PUBLIC REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE
 Taxation
 26. (1) No taxation shall be imposed otherwise than under the au-
 thority of an Act of Parliament.
 (2) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 Custody of Public Money
 27. There shall be a Consolidated Fund and a Contingencies Fund,
 together with such other public funds as may be provided for by law.
 28. (1) The produce of taxation, receipts of capital and interest in
 respect of public loans, and all other public revenue shall be paid into
 the Consolidated Fund unless required or permitted by law to be paid
 into any other fund or account.
 (2) The President may, in relation to any department of State, direct
 that a separate public account be established for the department and
 that the revenue of the department be paid into that account.
 29. (1) Expenditure shall not be met from any public fund or public
 account except under a warrant issued by authority of the President.
 .: (2) Whenever a sum becomes payable which is charged by law on a
 public fund or on the general revenues and assets of Ghana, the Presi-
 
 Ghana
 
 220
 
 
 dent or a person authorized by him in that behalf shall cause a warrant
 to be issued for the purpose of enabling that sum to be paid.
 (3) A warrant may be issued by authority of the President for the
 purpose of enabling public money to be applied:
 (a) as part of moneys granted for the public service by a vote of the
 National Assembly under this Part of the Constitution, or
 (b) in defraying, in the manner provided by Article Thirty-four of the
 Constitution, urgent expenditure authorized under that Article, or
 (c) in performance of an agreement to grant a loan made under
 Article Thirty five of the Constitution.
 30. Where:
 (a) money is drawn out of a public fund or public account for the
 purpose of being applied as part of moneys granted for a particular
 public service by a vote of the National Assembly, but
 (b) the money so drawn proves to be in excess of the amount granted
 for that service,
 particulars of the excess shall be laid before the National Assembly and,
 if the National Assembly so resolve, the amount originally granted for
 the service in question shall be treated for accounting purposes as increased
 to include the amount of the excess.
 Moneys granted by Vote of the National Assembly
 31. (1) The President shall cause to be prepared annually under heads
 for each public service estimates of expenditure, other than expenditure
 charged by law on a public fund or on the general revenues and assets of
 Ghana, which will be required to be incurred for the public services during
 the following financial year; and, when approved by the Cabinet, the
 estimates so prepared (which shall be known as "the annual estimates")
 shall be laid before the National Assembly.
 (2) Each head of the annual estimates shall be submitted to the vote of
 the National Assembly but no amendment of the estimates shall be moved.
 (3) A vote of the National Assembly approving a head of the annual
 estimates shall constitute a grant by the Assembly of moneys not
 exceeding the amount specified in that head to be applied within the
 financial year in question for the service to which the head relates.
 32. (1) If it appears that the vote of the National Assembly on any
 heads of the annual estimates will not be taken before the commencement
 of the financial year to which they relate, the President shall cause to be
 prepared under those heads estimates of the expenditure which will
 be required for the continuance of the public services in question until
 the said vote is taken; and, when approved by the Cabinet, the estimates
 so prepared (which shall be known as "provisional estimates") shall be
 laid before the National Assembly.
 
 Ghana
 
 221
 
 
 (2) If, after the National Assembly has voted upon the annual estimates
 for any financial year, it appears that the moneys granted in respect
 of any heads thereof are likely to be insufficient or that expenditure
 is likely to be incurred in that year on a public service falling under a
 head not included in the annual estimates, the President shall cause
 to be prepared under the relevant heads estimates of the additional
 expenditure; and, when approved by the Cabinet, the estimates so
 prepared (which shall be known as "supplementary estimates") shall
 be laid before the National Assembly.
 (3) Sections (2) and (3) of Article Thirty-one of the Constitution shall
 apply in relation to provisional and supplementary estimates as they
 apply in relation to the annual estimates:
 Provided that, where an item of expenditure is included both in
 provisional estimates and in the annual estimates, a grant in respect
 of that item shall not by virtue of this section be taken to have been
 made more than once.
 33. In addition to granting moneys on estimates of expenditure the
 National Assembly may, if satisfied that it is necessary in the public
 interest to do so, make any extraordinary grant of money for the public
 service, including a grant on a vote of credit, that is a grant of money
 to be used for a purpose which, for reasons of national security or by
 reason of the indefinite character of the service in question, cannot be
 described in detailed estimates.
 Expenditure out of Contigencies Fund
 34. (1) Where in the opinion of the President:
 (a) money is urgently required to be expended for a public service,
 and
 (b) the payment thereof would exceed the amount granted by the
 National Assembly for that service or the service is one for which no
 amount has been so granted, and
 (c) it is not practicable to summon a meeting of the National Assem-
 bly in sufficient time to obtain the necessary grant,
 the President may by executive instrument authorize the money required
 to be drawn from the Contingencies Fund.
 (2) An executive instrument made undbr this Article shall specify
 the head under which the expenditure in question would have been
 shown if it had been included in the annual estimatei.
 (3) As soon as is practicable after an executive instrument has been
 made under this Article:
 (a) the instrument shall be laid before the National Assembly, and
 (b) a resolution authorizing the transfer to the Contingencies Fund
 from a public fund specified in the resolution of an amount equal
 
 222
 
 Ghana
 
 
 to the amount of the expenditure to which the instrument relates
 shall be moved in the National Assembly by a Minister authorized
 in that behalf by the President.
 (4) In addition to sums transferred under section (3) of this Article,
 the National Assembly may from time to time authorize the transfer
 from the Consolidated Fund to the Contingencies Fund of sums required
 to maintain an adequate balance therein.
 Public Loans
 35. (1) The President may on behalf of the Republic enter into an
 agreement for the granting of a loan out of any public fund or public
 account if he thinks it expedient in the public interest so to do.
 (2) If the National Assembly so resolve, agreements entered into under
 this Article for amounts exceeding the amount specified in the As-
 sembly's resolution shall not become operative unless ratified by the
 Assembly.
 (3) As soon as is practicable after an agreement has been entered into
 under this Article, particulars of the agreement, and of the borrower
 and the purpose for which the loan is required, shall be laid before the
 National Assembly.
 36. No loan shall be raised for the purposes of the Republic otherwise
 than under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 37. (1) The public debt, interest thereon, sinking fund payments in
 respect thereof, and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the
 management thereof are hereby charged on the general revenues and
 assets of Ghana.
 (2) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 Audit of Public Accounts
 38. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General, who shall be appointed
 by the President and who shall not be removable except by the President
 in pursuance of a resolution of the National Assembly supported by the
 votes of at least two thirds of the total number of Members of Parliament
 and passed on the ground of stated misbehaviour or of infirmity of body
 or mind.
 (2) The Auditor-General shall retire from office on attaining the age
 of fifty-five years or such higher age as may be prescribed by law.
 (3) The Auditor-General may resign his office by writing under his hand
 addressed to the President.
 (4) The salary of the Auditor-General shall be determined by the
 National Assembly, is hereby charged on the Consolidated Fund and
 shall not be diminished during his term of office.
 
 Ghana
 
 223
 
 
 39. (1) The accounts of all departments of State shall be audited by
 the Auditor-General who, with his deputies, shall at all times be entitled
 to have access to all books, records, stores and other matters relating to
 such accounts.
 (2) The Auditor-General shall report annually to the National Assembly
 on the exercise of his functions under section (1) of this Article, and shall
 in his report draw attention to irregularities in the accounts audited
 by him.
 PART VI
 LAW AND JUSTICE
 Laws of Ghana
 40. Except as may be otherwise provided by an enactment made after
 the coming into operation of the Constitution, the laws of Ghana comprise
 the following:
 (a) the Constitution,
 (b) enactments made by or under the authority of the Parliament
 established by the Constitution,
 (c) enactments other than the Constitution made by or under the
 authority of the Constituent Assembly.
 (d) enactments in force immediately before the coming into operation
 of the Constitution,
 (e) the common law, and
 (f) customary law.
 Superior and Inferior Courts
 41. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court and a High Court, which shall be
 the superior courts of Ghana.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the judicial power
 of the State is conferred on the Supreme Court and the High Court,
 and on such inferior courts as may be provided for by law.
 (8) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 Provisions as to Superior Courts
 42. (1) The Supreme Court shall be the final court of appeal, with
 such appellate and other jurisduction as may be provided for by law.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction in all matters
 where a question arises whether an enactment was made in excess of
 the powers conferred on Parliament by or under the Constitution,
 
 224
 
 Ghana
 
 
 and if any such question arises in the High Court or an inferior court,
 the hearing shall be adjourned and the question referred to the Supreme
 Court for decision.
 (3) Subject to section (2) of this Article, the High Court shall have such
 original and appellate jurisdiction as may be provided for by law.
 . (4) The Supreme Court shall in principle be bound to follow its own
 previous decisions on questions of law, and the High Court shall be
 bound to follow previous decisions of the Supreme Court on such
 questions, but neither court shall be otherwise bound to follow the
 previous decisions of any court on questions of law.
 43. Provisions shall be made by law for the composition of superior
 courts in particular proceedings:
 Provided that no appeal shall be decided by the Supreme Court unless
 the court hearing the appeal consists of at least three Judges, of whom
 at least one is a Judge of the Supreme Court; and no question whether
 an enactment was made in excess of the powers conferred on Parliament
 by or under the Constitution shall be decided by the Supreme Court
 unless the court considering the question comprises at least three Judges
 of the Supreme Court.
 Judges of the Superior Courts
 44. (1) The President shall by instrument under the Presidential Seal
 appoint one of the Judges of the Supreme Court to be Chief Justice of Ghana.
 (2) The Chief Justice shall be President of the Supreme Court and Head
 of the Judicial Service.
 (3) The appointment of a Judge as Chief Justice may at any time be
 revoked by the President by instrument under the Presidential Seal.
 45. (1) The Judges of the Supreme Court and the Judges of the High
 Court shall be appointed by the President by instrument under the Public
 Seal.
 (2) Provision shall be made by law for the form and administration of
 the judicial oath which shall be taken by every person appointed as a
 Judge of the Supreme Court, or as a Judge of the High Court before
 the exercise by him of any judicial function.
 (3) Subject to the following provisions of this Article, no person shall
 be removed from office as a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Judge
 of the High Court except by the President in pursuance of a resolution
 of the National Assembly supported by the votes of not less than two-
 thirds of the Members of Parliament and passed on the grounds of
 stated misbehavior or infirmity of body or mind:
 Provided that the President may at any time for reasons which to him
 appear sufficient remove from office a Judge of the Supreme Court or a
 Judge of the High Court.
 
 Ghana
 
 225
 
 
 (4) Unless the President by instrument under his hand extends the
 tenure of office of the Judge for a definite period specified in the
 instrument, a Judge of the Supreme Court shall retire from office on
 attaining the age of sixty five years and a Judge of the High Court shall
 retire from office on attaining the age of sixty-two years.
 (5) A Judge of a superior court may resign his office by writing under
 his hand addressed to the President.
 (6) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 46.(1) The salary of a Judge of a superior court shall be determined by
 the National Assembly and shall not be diminished while he remains in
 office.
 (2) All salaries and allowances paid under this Article and all pensions
 and other retiring allowances paid in respect of service as Chief Justice
 or other Judge of a superior court are hereby charged on the Consolidated
 Fund.
 Attorney General
 47. (1) There shall be an Attorney General, who shall be a Minister of
 Ghana or other person appointed by the President.
 (2) Subject to the directions of the President, there shall be vested in
 the Attorney General responsibility for the initiation, conduct and
 discontinuance of civil proceedings by the Republic and prosecutions for
 criminal offences, and for the defence of civil proceedings brought
 against the Republic.
 (8) The office of the Attorney General shall become vacant:
 (a) if his appointment is revoked by the President; or
 (b) on the acceptance by the President of his resignation from office;
 or
 (c) immediately before the assumption of office of a President.
 President's powers of mercy
 48. (1) The President shall have power, in respect of any criminal
 offence:
 (a) to grant a pardon to the offender, or
 (b) to order a respite of the execution of any sentence passed on the
 offender, or
 (c) to remit any sentence so passed or any penalty or forfeiture
 incurred by reason of the offence.
 (2) Where the President remits a sentence of death he may order the
 offender to be imprisoned until such time as the President orders his
 release.
 
 226
 
 Ghana
 
 
 Ghana
 
 PART VII
 HOUSES OF CHIEFS
 49. There shall be a House of Chiefs for each Region of Ghana.
 50. A House of Chiefs shall consist of such Chiefs, and shall have such
 functions relating to customary law and other matters, as may be provided
 by law.
 PART VIII
 THE PUBLIC SERVICES
 51. (1) The Public Services of Ghana shall consist of the Civil Service,
 the Judicial Service, the Police Service, the Local Government Service, and
 such other Public Services as may be provided for by law.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and save as is other-
 wise provided by law, the appointment,, promotion, transfer, termi-
 nation of appointment, dismissal and disciplinary control of members
 of the Public Services is vested in the President.
 52. All pensions, gratuities and other allowances payable on retirement
 to members of the Civil Service, the Judicial Service and the Police Service
 are hereby charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 PART IX
 THE ARMED FORCES
 53. (1) Neither the President nor any other person shall raise any
 armed force except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 (2) The power to repeal or alter this Article is reserved to the People.
 54. (1) Subject to the provisions of any enactment for the time being
 in force, the powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
 Forces shall include the power to commission persons as officers in the said
 Forces and to order any of the said Forces to engage in operations for the
 defence of Ghana, for the preservation of public order, for relief in cases
 of emergency or for any other purpose appearing to the Commander-in-
 Chief to be expedient.
 (2) The Commander-in-Chief shall have power, in a case where it appears
 to him expedient to do so for the security of the State, to dismiss a
 member of the Armed Forces or to order a member of the Armed Forces
 not to exercise any authority vested in him as a member thereof until
 the Commander-in-Chief otherwise directs; and a purported exercise
 of authority in contravention of such an order shall be ineffective.
 
 227
 
 
 Ghana
 
 PART X
 SPECIAL POWERS FOR FIRST PRESIDENT
 55. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Article. Twenty of the Consti-
 tution, the person appointed as first President of Ghana shall have, during
 his initial period of office, the powers conferred on him by this Article.
 (2) The first President may, whenever he considers it to be in the na-
 tional interest to do so, give directions by legislative instrument.
 (3) An instrument made under this Article may alter (whether expressly
 or by implication) any enactment other than the Constitution.
 (4) Section (2) of Article Forty-two of the Constitution shall apply in
 relation to the powers conferred by this Article as it applies in relation
 to the powers conferred on Parliament.
 (5) For the purposes of this Article the first President's initial period
 of office shall be taken to continue until some other person assumes
 office as President.
 (6) The power to repeal or alter this Article during the first President's
 initial period of office is reserved to the People.
 
 228
 
 
</pre>
