<pre>
 Rwanda
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of
 RWANDA'
 November 24, 1962
 PREAMBLE
 The National Assembly
 Confident in all powerful God,
 Met in constituent assembly in Kigali on October 4, 1961, following its
 election by universal direct adult suffrage on September 25, 1961,
 Considering the results of the referendum of September 25, 1961,
 by which the Rwanda people by the great majority of 79.8% of the votes,
 consecrated the definitive abolition of the Mwami regime, the defeat
 of Mwami Kigeri V, and the establishment of a democratic republican
 regime,
 Invested with the powers of national sovereignty as a result of the
 abrogation of the trusteeship agreement and by the proclamation of
 national independence on July 1, 1962,
 Giving the country fully democratic institutions and thus consolidating
 liberation of the Rwanda people from the feudal colonialist yoke,
 In order that the power of the Governmental authorities and the
 pacification of the country may rest on a basis both legal and stable,
 In order to ensure individual, family and national tranquillity,
 In order effectively to realize national unity, social justice and respect
 for the human person based on the liberty, equality and fraternity of all
 members of the Rwanda community,
 In order to guarantee to present and future generations the benefits
 of liberty, the full development of the individual and collective prosperity,
 Desirous of ensuring the fraternal co-operation of Rwanda with all the
 peoples of Africa and the world,
 Defines, adopts and proclaims the present Constitution.
 1 Constitution de la R~publique Rwandaise. Edith par le Service de la Prdaidence de la
 REpublique Rwandaise. Supplied by the Foreign Ministry. Translated by the Editor.
 
 675
 
 
 Rwanda
 
 TITLE I
 THE REPUBLIC
 Art. 1. Rwanda is a democratic, social and sovereign Republic. It takes
 the name "Rwanda Republic."
 Art. 2. The Mwami regime is abolished and may not be restored.
 The Mwami Kigeri V and all his dynasty shall be deprived of their
 royal prerogatives.
 Art. 3. The Rwanda Republic ensures the equality of all its citizens
 without distinction of race, origin, sex or religion.
 It respects all religions which are not incompatible with public order
 and the security of the State.
 Art. 4. The national emblem is the tricolor flag, red, yellow and green
 with a black letter R in the middle of the yellow stripe.
 The motto of the Republic is "Liberty, co-operation, progress."
 Its principle is "Government of the people, by the people and for the
 people."
 The armorial bearings of the Republic are a seal representing the
 ideogram of a turtledove and the olive of peace, the hoe and and scythe
 of work, the bow and arrow symbolizing the defence of democratic liber-
 ties, together with the motto of the Republic.
 The National anthem shall be determined by law,
 The capital of the Republic shall determined by law.
 Art. 5. The national language of the Rwanda Republic is Kinyarwanda.
 The official languages are Kinyarwanda and French.
 Art. 6. Rwanda nationality and the conditions of naturalization shall
 be determined by law.
 Art. 7. All power emanates from the nation.
 National sovereignty belongs to the Rwanda people who exercise it
 through their representatives.
 A law shall determine the conditions and methods for organizing the
 people's vote.
 Art. 8. Suffrage shall always be universal, equal and secret. It may be
 direct or indirect.
 Art. 9. All Rwanda nationals of both sexes who have reached their
 majority and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the
 conditions stipulated in the electoral law.
 Art. 10. Political groups which fulfil the conditions laid down by law
 shall take part in the expression of the suffrage. They shall be formed
 and shall exercise their activities freely on condition that they respect
 democratic principles and do not threaten the republican form of the
 State, the integrity of the national territory and the security of the State.
 
 676
 
 
 The State recognizes constructive opposition but will repress destructive
 agitation.
 Art. 11. The Rwanda republic shall be divided into prefectures to which
 the law may grant civil status. Each prefecture may be divided into sub-
 prefectures.
 Each prefecture shall be divided into communes having civil status.
 A law shall determine the organization and operation of the prefectures
 and the communes. It may modify their boundaries and their number.
 TITLE II
 THE PUBLIC LIBERTIES
 Chapter I. The human person
 Art. 12. The human person is sacred. It is protected by the State.
 Art. 13. The fundamental liberties, as they are defined by the Universal
 Declaration of the Rights of Man, are guaranteed to all citizens. Their
 exercise may be regulated by law and by regulation.
 Art. 14. Everyone has the right to the free development of his person-
 ality, provided he does not violate the rights of others nor infringe upon
 the public order and the provisions of the law.
 Art. 15. The freedom of the human person is inviolable. No one may be
 condemned except by virtue of a law in effect before the act was com-
 mitted.
 No one may plead ignorance of the law.
 No penality may be imposed except by virtue of a written law.
 Criminal, responsibility shall be personal. Civil responsibility shall be
 defined by law.
 The absolute right to a defense is established in all the states and at
 all stages of the procedure.
 The right to asylum is recognized under the conditions stipulated by
 law.
 Extradition shall be authorized only within the limitations provided
 by law.
 Art. 16. All citizens are legally equal before the law, without distinction
 of race, clan, color, sex or religion.
 Art. 17. The privileges of caste are abolished and may not be restored.
 No new privileges may be instituted of any kind whatsoever.
 Art. 18. Everyone has the right freely to express and diffuse his opinions
 by all legal means. Everyone has the right to information, without
 hindrance, from the sources of knowledge which are accessible to all.
 These rights shall only be limited by the provisions of laws and regu-
 lations and by respect for the security of the State and the honor of others.
 
 Rwanda
 
 677
 
 
 Art. 19. All citizens have the right freely to form associations and
 societies provided they conform to the formalities required by the laws
 and regulations.
 Art. 20. Groups whose purposes or activities are contrary to the laws,
 directed against the public order, the republican form of Government and
 the security of the State are prohibited.
 Art. 21. The secrecy of correspondence, of postal, telegraphic and
 telephonic communications is inviolable. No restrictions to this invio-
 lability may be made except by law.
 Art. 22. All citizens of the Republic have the right to travel and to
 settle freely within the national territory. This right may be limited only
 by law for reasons of public order and the security of the State. No one
 may be subjected to security measures except in the cases provided by
 law for reasons of public order and the security of the State.
 Art. 23. Private property, individual or collective, is inviolable. It
 may not be threatened except in cases of public need legally attested and
 subject to a just and prior indemnity.
 Art. 24. The domicile is inviolable. No search may be ordered except
 by the authorities appointed by law. Searches may be executed only
 according to the forms prescribed by law.
 Chapter II. The basis of family and civil society
 Art. 25. All forms of slavery are abolished and may not be restored.
 Art. 26. The family, in its three constitutent elements, man, woman
 and children is the primary basis of Rwanda society.
 The State and the public bodies have the duty to create conditions
 favorable to the normal development of the family.
 Art. 27. The father and mother have the natural right to raise their
 children.
 Art. 28. Only monogamous marriage, civil or religious, is recognized
 by this Constitution. The rules for its registration shall be defined by law.
 Art. 29. Polygamy is prohibited.
 Divorce may be authorized by the competent jurisdiction and according
 to the forms provided by law.
 Art. 30. Men and women are legally equal. The man is the natural head
 of the family.
 Chapter III. The education of Youth
 Art. 31. The State and the public bodies shall create the conditions and
 the public institutions necessary to guarantee the education of children.
 Art. 32. The Constitution recognizes both official and free education
 equally. However, subsidies for free schools shall be based on the pro-
 
 678
 
 Rwanda
 
 
 portion of their students and on respect for the conventions concluded
 between the State and the legal representatives of the scholastic establish-
 ments concerned.
 The general cost of a student in a subsidized school may not be less than
 that in a free school with the same program.
 Art. 33. Privileges in educational matters shall be abolished and may
 not be restored. Violation of this rule may involve the closing of any
 scholastic establishment where such discrimination is practiced.
 Art. 34. Without prejudice to the application of Article 27 of this Consti-
 tution, primary education shall be obligatory for all children of school
 age under the conditions to be established by law. Until the age of 15,
 education shall be wholly or partly free for any student whose parents
 are financially incapable of paying the fee.
 Art. 35. Military service is obligatory for all male citizens of at least
 18 years of age save for the exceptions authorized by law. It shall be
 directed principally at the physical, moral and civic development of youth.
 A law shall define the means of implementing the provisions of this
 Article.
 Art. 36. Other provisions relating to public education shall be defined
 by law.
 Chapter IV. Religions and Religious Communities
 Art 37. Freedom of conscience and the free profession and practice of
 religion are guaranteed to all subject to respect for the public order
 and security of the State.
 Art. 38. Religious institutions and communities shall regulate and
 administer their affairs in an autonomous manner, on condition that they
 do not infringe upon the prerogatives of the State nor mix in the political
 domain.
 Art. 39. All communist activity and propaganda are forbidden.
 Chapter V. The organization and freedom of work
 Art. 40. Forced labor outside of prison is abolished and may not be
 restored.
 Art. 41. Everyone has the right to work. All citizens shall have equal
 opportunity to gain public employment. No one may be injured in his
 work by reason of his origin, race, sex, color, opinions or personal beliefs,
 so long as their manifestation does not threaten the public order or morals,
 or the security of the State.
 Art. 42. Every worker may belongs to the union of his choice and may
 defend his rights by union activity provided he respects the provisions
 of the social legislation.
 
 Rwanda
 
 679
 
 
 The right to strike is recognized. It shall be exercised within the frame-
 work of the laws relating thereto. It may in no circumstances threaten
 the freedom of work, public order or the security of the State.
 Every worker may participate, through his delegates, in the deter-
 mination of the conditions of work.
 Art. 43. The right to strike shall not be recognized for civil servants
 nor agents of public bodies.
 Art. 44. The national economy shall be organized in accordance with
 plans which conform to the principles of social justice, to the promotion
 of the family, the development of the productivity of the country and
 raising the standard of living of individuals.
 The social domain shall fall within the sphere of law.
 TITLE III
 THE HIGHER INSTITUTIONS OF THE
 REPUBLIC
 Art. 45. The separation and co-operation of the executive, legislative
 and judicial powers shall be consecrated and regulated by this Consti-
 tution.
 Art. 46. The higher institutions of the Republic are the Presidency
 of the Republic and the Government, the National Assembly and the
 Supreme Court.
 Art. 47. Before taking office as President of the Republic, Minister,
 deputy, high judge or high official of the Republic, citizens must take the
 following oath:
 "In the name of all powerful God, I swear to the nation faithfully to
 fulfil my functions, to keep faithful to the Rwanda Republic and its
 regime, and to promote the interest of the Rwanda people, always
 respecting the Constitution and the laws."
 Art. 48. The President of the Republic and the President of the
 National Assembly shall take the oath before the National Assembly
 at the time of their election.
 The President of the National Assembly shall administer the oath to
 deputies.
 The President of the Republic shall administer the oath to the President
 of the Supreme Court and the ministers before the National Assembly
 during its first session.
 The method of administering the oath to the other judges and officials
 of the Republic shall be stipulated by law.
 
 680
 
 Rwanda
 
 
 TITLE IV
 THE EXECUTIVE POWER
 Art. 49. The executive power shall be exercised by the President of the
 Republic, Head of State and the Government, and by the Ministers
 appointed by him.
 The Government shall exercise the executive power by means of presi-
 dential or ministerial orders.
 All Government acts must be published in the Official Journal of the
 Republic within fifteen days of their signature except where it is otherwise
 provided.
 Art. 50. A law shall establish the emoluments and benefits attaching to
 the presidential and ministerial function.
 Chapter I. The Presidency of the Republic
 Art. 51. The President of the Republic is the supreme Head of the
 State.
 Art. 52. The President of the Republic shall be elected at the begining
 of each legislature by universal direct suffrage and by simple majority.
 In case of decease, forfeiture or resignation during the term of a legis-
 lature, new elections for President of the Republic shall take place by
 universal direct suffrage and by simple majority within thirty days.
 The election of the President of the Republic shall, in such circum-
 stances, be organized in accordance with the electoral law by a com-
 mission appointed by the secretariat of the National Assembly and super-
 vised by the Council of State of the Supreme Court.
 The President of the Republic shall be assisted by a Vice-President
 appointed by him and approved by the National Assembly. He shall have
 the duty of assisting the President of the Republic and replacing him
 when the latter is absent.
 Art. 53. The term of President of the Republic shall be four years.
 He shall be eligible for reelection. He may not however be reelected for
 more than four successive terms.
 If the President is elected during the term of a legislature he shall
 complete the term of his predecessor.
 Art. 54. Any male citizen who is a communal counselor, not less than
 85 nor more than 60 years of age may, in accordance with this Consti-
 tution, stand as candidate for the Presidency of the Republic. A law shall
 stipulate the method of election.
 Art. 55. After his election, the President of the Republic shall appoint
 his ministerial team and shall present himself and it before the National
 Assembly to explain his program and be inaugurated.
 
 681
 
 Rw~anda
 
 
 Art. 56. The President of the Republic shall:
 (a) appoint and revoke each member of the Government and inform
 the National Assembly;
 (b) appoint the President and Vice-Presidents of the sections of the
 Supreme Court on the advice of the National Assembly and the Govern-
 ment met together;
 (c) determine the powers of the ministers and the nature and sphere of the
 services under their authority. The President of the Republic may
 delegate powers to the ministers for matters relating to their ministerial
 departments. The President of the Republic shall fix the scope of such
 delegation of authority;
 (d) determine and conduct the general policy of the Government;
 (e) preside over the Council of the Government;
 (f) appoint and dismiss all high civil, military and judicial officials
 on the proposal of the appropriate Minister. The posts of these officials
 shall be set forth in a presidential order;
 (g) appoint, accredit and dismiss Ambassadors and other represen-
 tatives to foreign powers and inform the National Assembly. Foreign
 diplomatic missions shall be accredited to him;
 (h) represent the Rwanda Republic in its external relations;
 (i) negotiate and conclude all treaties, agreements and conventions
 which he may communicate to the National Assembly; however,
 peace treaties, treaties of alliance, commercial treaties, treaties that
 involve modifications of the frontiers of the national territory or
 affect the rights of sovereignty, as well as those whose financial
 implications have not been provided for by the budget, shall not enter
 into effect until they have been ratified by the National Assembly;
 (j) have the power to initiate legislation and shall implement the laws;
 (k) sign and promulgate the laws of the Republic within fifteen days of
 the transmission to the Government of the finally passed text; this time
 limit shall be reduced to five days in cases of emergency so declared
 by the National Assembly. Within the time limit fixed for promul-
 gation, the President of the Republic may, by a message giving the
 reasons, ask the Assembly for a second reading; this may not be refused;
 (1) address messages to the nation;
 (in) suspend for a maximum period of fifteen days the sessions of the
 National Assembly, but never dissolve it; suspension may not, however,
 be repeated during the same session;
 (n) decree emergency measures after consulting with the Council
 of the Government, the President of the National Assembly and the
 President of the Supreme Court;
 (o) declare war and sign armistices;
 (p) exercise the right of pardon;
 (q) issue the currency;
 
 Rw~anda
 
 682
 
 
 (r) have the right of a suspending veto; if the President of the Republic
 vetos a law passed by the National Assembly, he must return it within
 fifteen days to the Assembly for a second reading. If the law is passed
 on second reading and is not declared unconstitutional by the Supreme
 Court, it shall have the force of law and must be promulgated.
 Art. 57. Any law which has been passed shall simultaneously be trans-
 mitted to the President of the Republic and to the Supreme Court which
 shall rule within one week, or four days in case of emergency, on its
 constitutionality before it is promulgated by the President of the Republic
 within the time limit stipulated in Article 56.
 If the President of the Republic does not promulgate a law within the
 legal time limit, the President of the National Assembly shall inform the
 Supreme Court.
 The Supreme Court shall rule within five days of the matter being
 referred to it.
 Art. 58. During his term of office the President of the Republic shall
 not exercise any commercial, financial, or industrial profession nor any
 other remunerated public or private activity. He may neither acquire nor
 dispose gratuitously of any state property. In no case may he exchange
 personal property for state property.
 Art. 59. The President of the Republic shall be the supreme head of the
 army.
 Art. 60. The President of the Republic shall enjoy immunity. This
 immunity may not be lifted except by indictment voted by the National
 Assembly by secret ballot by a majority of three fourths of the deputies.
 He shall then be arraigned before the Supreme Court.
 Art. 61. If the National Assembly by a majority of four fifths of its
 deputies finds the President of the Republic unworthy, his forfeiture of
 office shall be pronounced by the Supreme Court.
 Chapter II. The Government of the Rwanda Republic
 Art. 62. The President of the Republic shall be assisted in the execution
 of the policy of his government by his ministers. The ministers shall
 exercise the powers assigned to them and shall countersign the acts of the
 President of the Republic when they are entrusted with their execution.
 Art. 63. Each minister shall direct the activities of his department
 within the framework of the general policy of the Republic. He shall
 ensure the implementation of the laws and regulations within his sphere.
 Art. 64. The ministers meeting in the Council of Ministers on the
 convocation and under the chairmanship of the President of the Republic
 or, in his absence, the Vice-President of the Republic, must be heard and
 consulted on the following points:
 - decisions affecting the general policy of the State;
 
 Rwamda
 
 683
 
 
 - government bills;
 - proposed regulations;
 - proposed decrees regulating the public administration;
 - exceptional measures required for the maintenance of public order;
 - appointments and dismissals to all the high offices of the State within
 the administration, the judiciary, the army and the foreign service.
 Art. 65. The Council of Ministers shall be of one mind with the President
 of the Republic. The resignation of one minister for whatever reason shall
 not, however, involve the resignation of the Government.
 Each minister may present his resignation to the President of the
 Republic as a personal matter. Such resignation shall not be definitive
 unless within eight days it has neither been withdrawn nor refused by the
 President of the Republic on the advice of the Council of Ministers.
 The resignation of the Government may be presented only by the Presi-
 dent of the Republic under the conditions stipulated by this Consti-
 tution.
 Art. 66. Ministers and secretaries of state who are deputies may sit
 in the National Assembly in the same way as other deputies elected by
 universal suffrage. In case of absence or impediment, they shall be replaced
 by their substitutes elected from the same list.
 The Vice-President of the Republic and ministers, whether or not
 deputies, shall enjoy immunity. Their immunity may only be lifted by
 indictment voted by the National Assembly be secret ballot by a majority
 of three fourths of the deputies. They shall then be arraigned before the
 Supreme Court.
 Art. 67. No relation by blood or marriage to the second degree of the
 President of the Republic may be President of the National Assembly,
 President of the Supreme Court, Vice-President of the Republic or
 minister.
 The functions of Vice-President of the Republic and of minister shall
 be incompatible with the exercise of any other remunerated public or
 private activity.
 During their term of office, the Vice-President of the Republic and
 the ministers may neither acquire nor dispose gratuitously of any state
 property. Under no circumstances may they exchange personal property
 for state property.
 Chapter III. Government Responsibility
 Art. 68. The President of the Republic shall alone be responsible before
 the National Assembly; the Vice-President and ministers shall be re-
 sponsible to him.
 The President of the Republic alone, acting with the advice of the
 Council of the Government, may pledge the existence of the Government
 
 684
 
 Rwanda
 
 
 before the National Assembly. Adoption or rejection of all or part of
 proposals submitted to him for decision may be made a question of
 confidence. If so, such proposals must be examined by the Assembly
 within a time limit not less than two days.
 Art. 69. The National Assembly may question the responsibility of the
 President of the Republic and the Government by a motion of censure
 relating to the general policy of the Government.
 A motion of censure may not be submitted to the Assembly except
 when oral questions have been without effect.
 Oral questions shall be addressed to the President of the Republic
 who may delegate to the Vice-President or the minister responsible the
 duty of answering.
 A motion of censure, to be admissible, must be signed by two fifths of
 the deputies to the National Assembly.
 If the motion of censure is rejected, its .signatories may not propose a
 further motion during the same year.
 Art. 70. A vote of confidence or a vote on a motion of censure shall take
 place three full days after the matter has been filed, by secret ballot and an
 absolute majority of four fifths of the deputies to the National Assembly.
 Closure of ordinary or extraordinary sessions shall be postponed where
 necessary in order to allow fulfilment of the above stipulation.
 When confidence has been refused or a motion of censure adopted,
 the President of the Republic and his Government shall resign. The
 President of the National Assembly shall ensure the expedition of current
 business until the election of a new President of the Republic.
 Art. 71. The President of the Republic may resign. His resignation
 shall be received by the National Assembly. His resignation shall entail
 the resignation of his Government, which shall, however, ensure the dis-
 patch of current business until the election of a new President and the
 formation of his Government.
 Art. 72. Any institutional disagreement between the executive and
 legislative power which is not settled by this Constitution shall be sub-
 mitted to the opinion of the Supreme Court. Should disagreement persist,
 it shall be settled by referendum.
 TITLE V
 THE LEGISLATIVE POWER
 Art. 73. The legislative power shall belong concurrently to the National
 Assembly and the President of the Republic in accordance with the
 provisions of this Constitution.
 The National Assembly shall control the action of the President of the
 Republic and of his Government.
 
 Rwanda
 
 685
 
 
 The National Assembly shall be composed of members called "deputies
 to the National Assembly." Deputies shall be elected for four years by
 universal, direct, adult suffrage.
 Only citizens of the Rwanda Republic, at least 21 years of age and ful-
 filling the other conditions provided by the electoral law, may be elected
 as deputies to the National Assembly.
 A law shall fix the number of deputies, their emoluments, the con-
 ditions of election and the offices incompatible with membership.
 Art. 74. The National Assembly may hold its sessions only at the capital
 except in case of force majeure.
 No decision whatever its purpose shall be valid that is taken when the
 Assembly has not been convened or has no agenda or when it is not in
 session or not sitting in its place of session.
 Art. 75. The legislative power of the National Assembly shall be
 exercised through laws.
 When the National Assembly is unable to meet, the legislative power
 shall be exercised temporarily by the President of the Republic in the
 Council of Ministers by decree-laws.
 In cases of emergency, the President of the Republic may be entrusted
 with the legislative power exercised through decree-laws for a period
 of six months, subject to confirmation by the National Assembly. He
 must, in any circumstances, refer to the National Assembly within two
 months.
 Art. 76. The National Assembly shall be presided over by a President
 or Vice-President elected by simple majority of the deputies.
 Art. 77. All laws shall be published in the Journal Officiel of the Re-
 public within fifteen days of their signature. They shall not enter into
 force until ten full days after their publication.
 This time limit may be reduced or increased, however, if the law so
 provides.
 Art. 78. The secretariat of the National Assembly shall be composed
 of the President, Vice-President and Secretary-Deputy whom it shall
 elect.
 Art. 79. The President or, in case of absence or impediment, the Vice-
 President shall organize the administrative work of the Assembly, draw up
 its agenda after consulting with the secretariat, fix the date of sessions,
 convene the deputies, open and preside over the debates and pronounce
 their closure.
 Art. 80. Sessions shall conform to the following rules:
 - The Assembly shall hold two ordinary sessions each year. The first
 shall open in the first year of the legislature, eight days after the
 elections thereto, and those of the following years shall open during
 the first fifteen days of October.: The second session shall take place
 during the first fifteen days of April.
 
 686
 
 Rwanda
 
 
 - The duration of each ordinary session may not exceed three months.
 In case of need, however, the Assembly may decide by a two thirds
 majority to extend an ordinary session.
 - The Assembly may be convened in extraordinary session on the
 request of the President of the Republic, the President of the Assembly
 or of an absolute majority of deputies.
 - The duration of each extraordinary session may not exceed fifteen
 days.
 - The Assembly in extraordinary session may discuss only those matters
 for which it has been convened.
 Art. 81. The National Assembly shall pass the budget.
 If the budget has not been passed forty days after the opening of the
 ordinary session or if it has not been passed in balance, the President of
 the Republic shall return the budget bill within fifteen days to the National
 Assembly and if necessary shall convene it in extraordinary session.
 The National Assembly must then act within fifteen days.
 If it does not do so, or if the budget is not balanced, it shall be drawn
 up by the Government on the basis of that of the preceding fiscal year.
 The accounts of each fiscal year shall be examined and shall be approved
 by a law.
 Art. 82. No tax may be levied, modified or abolished except by law.
 Noone may be exempt from taxation except in the cases provided by
 law.
 A law shall determine the fundamental rules for collection the public
 revenues and the manner of effecting expenditure.
 The Government may not contract a loan nor engage in projects capable
 of being a charge on the public treasury for more than a year without the
 prior consent of the National Assembly.
 No monopoly may be granted except by law and for a limited period.
 Art. 83. A law shall prescribe the manner of preparation of the national
 budget and its presentation to the National Assembly.
 The general budget bill of the Republic must be submitted to the
 National Assembly for examination and approval before the end of the
 financial year.
 Each section of the budget shall be voted upon separately.
 Any transfer of funds from one section of the budget to another, or any
 expense for which no provision is made or which exceeds the budgetary
 provision, shall receive the prior approval of the National Assembly.
 The provisions relating to the budget of the Republic shall be applicable
 to any annexed independent budgets.
 A law shall determine the rules relating to the budgets of other public
 institutions.
 The budgetary law shall be valid for one year. The fiscal year shall
 begin on the first of January and expire on the 31st of December.
 
 Rwanda
 
 687
 
 
 Art. 84. Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. The account
 of the debates shall be published.
 The Assembly may sit in secret committee at the request of the President
 of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly or of two thirds
 of its members.
 Art. 85. Binding instructions on deputies shall be null and void. The
 vote of deputies shall be personal.
 Art. 86. Deputies shall enjoy parliamentary immunity. Immunity
 may only be lifted after indictment by the National Assembly voted
 by secret ballot by a majority of three fourth of the deputies. They shall
 then be arraigned before the Supreme Court.
 Art. 87. No deputy may be deprived of his seat so long as he does not
 fall under one of the cases of ineligibility provided by the electoral law in
 effect. His forfeiture shall be pronounced by the National Assembly by
 secret ballot and an absolute majority of four fifths of the deputies.
 Art. 88. No deputy may, during his term of office, acquire or dispose
 gratuitously of any state property; in no case may be exchange personal
 property for state property.
 TITLE VI
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE LEGISLATIVE AND
 EXECUTIVE POWERS
 Art. 89. Laws shall be passed by the National Assembly by simple
 majority. Organic laws, however, shall be voted by absolute majority.
 Art. 90. Laws may not be promulgated before the Supreme Court
 has declared that they conform to the Constitution. In case of non-
 conformity, the Supreme Court shall return the law to the President of the
 Republic who shall return it to the National Assembly for a second reading.
 Art. 91. Finance laws shall determine the resources and expenditures
 of the State under the conditions and with the reservations stipulated by
 an.organic law. Laws relating to planning shall determine the objectives
 and method of financing of the economic and social action of the State.
 Art. 92. Laws shall be sovereign in all spheres. Regulations may not
 contravene the provisions of a law.
 Art. 93. The President of the Republic, the Government and the
 deputies alike shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 The deputies and the Government shall have the right of amendment.
 Bills filed by deputies shall not be acceptable if their adoption would
 result either in a diminution of public resources or in the increase of
 public expenditure, unless accompanied by a proposal for revenues or
 economies to an equivalent amount.
 These provisions shall not apply to proposed resolutions filed by deputies.
 
 Rwanda
 
 688
 
 
 Art. 94. The President of the Republic must be informed of the agenda
 of the National Assembly and of its Commissions.
 The President of the Republic and the Ministers, whether or not
 deputies, may attend meetings if they desire and may be accompanied
 by experts of their choice. They may take part in debates whenever they
 express the wish to. They may only participate in the vote if they are
 deputies.
 Art. 95. The President of the Republic or a deputy may ask that a bill
 be voted upon urgently. A request to this effect of the President of the
 Republic may not be refused. A request by a deputy shall be considered
 by the National Assembly.
 If urgent examination is granted, the bill in question shall have priority
 on the agenda.
 Art. 96. The President of the Republic shall furnish the National
 Assembly with any explanations it requests regarding the action of the
 Government.
 The National Assembly shall have the the following methods of infor-
 mation and control with regard to governmental action:
 - the oral question;
 - the written question;
 - hearings of commissions;
 - commissions of inquiry.
 An organic law shall establish the conditions and procedure for the
 application of these methods of information and control.
 Art. 97. If over a period of three consecutive years, more than two
 ministerial crises occur either as a result of a motion of censure or of a
 refusal of a vote of confidence, the National Assembly shall be automa-
 tically dissolved.
 Other than as prescribed above, the National Assembly may only
 be dissolved by decision of the National Congress composed of the College
 of Communal Counselors, of the National Assembly and of the Govern-
 ment, voting by a simple majority of all its members.
 Dissolution of the National Assembly shall entail the resignation of the
 President of the Republic and of his Government.
 General elections, organized in accordance with the electoral law by
 the College of Secretaries General, shall take place under the supervision
 of the Council of State of the Supreme Court, at least twenty and at most
 forty days following dissolution.
 The new National Assembly shall meet by right on the eighth day at the
 latest following its election. If this should fall outside the periods pre-
 scribed for ordinary sessions, an extraordinary session shall be opened by
 right.
 
 Ruamda
 
 689
 
 
 TITLE VII
 THE JUDICIAL POWER
 Art. 98. The judiciary shall constitute an authority independent of the
 legislative and executive powers.
 Justice shall be rendered in the territory of the Republic in the name of
 the people.
 Art. 99. The following ordinary jurisdictions shall be recognized and
 consecrated by this Constitution: cantonal tribunals, courts of the first
 instance, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court.
 The following special jurisdictions may be instituted: councils of war,
 the military court, police courts and tribunals of commerce. Other special
 tribunals may be created by law.
 An organic law shall regulate their functioning.
 Art. 100. Hearings in courts and tribunals shall be public unless a
 closed session has been decided in certain cases in the interests of public
 order or morals.
 Art. 101. Noone may be arbitrarily detained. The judicial authority,
 guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure respect for this principle
 under the conditions stipulated by law.
 Art. 102. The Supreme Court shall direct and organize the courts and
 tribunals of the Republic.
 The Supreme Court shall be the guardian of the constitutionality
 of the laws.
 (a) It shall give its advice on the constitutionality of laws and regu-
 lations and control the actions of the executive and judicial powers
 by means of orders.
 (b) It shall provide an authentic interpretation of written or customary
 laws in case they are inadequate or imprecise.
 (c) It alone shall be competent to try the President of the Republic,
 the ministers, the deputies and their accomplices, indicted by the
 National Assembly by a majority of three fourths of its deputies, in
 criminal matters.
 (d) It shall rule on petitions for appeal and on requests for referral
 for reasons of legitimate suspicion.-
 (e) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 72 of this Consti-
 tution, it shall settle important differences between the State and
 individuals as well as institutional conflicts between the different
 organs of the State.
 (f) It shall act as the Court of Accounts of the Rwanda Republic in the
 name of the National Assembly.
 Art. 103. The Supreme Court shall be composed of five sections as
 follows:
 
 690
 
 Rwand
 
 
 (1) the Department of courts and tribunals;
 (2) the Court of Appeal;
 (3) the Constitutional Court;
 (4) the Council of State.
 (5) the Court of Accounts.
 An organic law shall provide for their functioning, their powers and the
 procedure applicable before each one.
 Art. 104. The Supreme Court of the Rwanda Republic shall be presided
 over by a President appointed by the President of the Republic from a list
 of two candidates proposed by the National Assembly and the Government
 met together for this purpose.
 The Vice-Presidents of the sections of the Supreme Court shall be
 appointed by the President of the Republic from a list of candidates
 proposed by the National Assembly and the Government meeting together.
 They shall be dismissed by the President of the Republic with the agree-
 ment of the National Assembly and the Government meeting together.
 Art. 105. The Supreme Court shall be subject to the authority of the
 law. In criminal matters it shall be bound by the definition of crimes and
 the penalties imposed by the criminal laws in force at the time the acts
 were committed.
 TITLE VIII
 CO-ORDINATION OF THE POWERS
 Art. 106. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 President of the Republic, supreme Head of the State, shall co-ordinate
 the general activity of the three branches of power of the Republic.
 TITLE IX
 CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT
 Art.107. The President of the Republic and the National Assembly
 alike shall have the right to initiate amendment of this Constitution.
 Any bill of amendment proposed by the deputies must be signed by at
 least two thirds of the members of the Assembly.
 Amendments must be passed by an absolute majority of four fifths
 at least of the deputies to the National Assembly meeting as a constituent
 Assembly.
 No procedure of amendment may be proceeded with if it -threatens
 the republican form of the State, the integrity of the national territory
 or the democratic principles which rule the Republic.
 
 Rwanda
 
 691
 
 
 Rwanda
 
 TITLE X
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 108. Except for new laws or regulations decided by the National
 Assembly or the Government of the Rwanda Republic, the legislation in
 force in Rwanda at the date of entry into force of this Constitution shall
 remain applicable insofar as it is not contrary thereto.
 Art. 109. An organic law shall determine the procedure whereby
 customary laws shall be codified and harmonized with the fundamental
 principles of this Constitution.
 TITLE XI
 FINAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 110. The Rwanda Republic may, upon the proposal of the Govern-
 ment and with the approval of the National Assembly in accordance with
 the procedure for constitutional amendment, associate or federate itself
 with other democratic countries.
 Art. 111. The present fundamental law shall be executed as the Consti-
 tution of the Rwanda Republic from the date of its promulgation.
 It is made and adopted by the Constituent Assembly in the name of the
 Rwanda people at Kigali, the twenty fourth day of the month of November
 of the year one thousand nine hundred and sixty two.
 
 692
 
 
</pre>
