<pre>
 Tanzania
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of
 TANGANYIKA'
 December 9, 1962
 Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation
 of freedom, justice and peace:
 And whereas the said rights include the right of the individual, whatever
 his race, tribe, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex,
 but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the
 public interest, to life, liberty, security of the person, the enjoyment
 of property, the protection of the law, freedom of conscience, freedom of
 expression, freedom of assembly and association, and respect for his
 private and family life:
 And whereas the said rights are best maintained and protected in a
 democratic society where the government is responsible to a freely-
 elected Parliament representative of the people and where the courts of
 law are independent and impartial:
 Now therefore, this Constitution, which makes provision for the government of Tanganyika as such a democratic society, is hereby enacted by
 the Constituent Assembly of Tanganyika.
 PART I
 THE REPUBLIC
 1. Tanganyika is a Sovereign Republic.
 2. The Public Seal of the Republic shall be such device as Parliament
 shall prescribe.
 
 1 C.A. No. 1, Government Printer, Dar es Salaam. See also Appendix, page 1101,
 for the Act of Union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar.
 
 PART II
 THE PRESIDENT
 3. (1) There shall be a President of Tanganyika who shall be the
 Head of State and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
 (2) The executive power of the Republic is vested in the President.
 (3) Except as may be otherwise provided by law, in the exercise of
 his functions, the President shall act in his own discretion and shall not
 be obliged to follow advice tendered by any other person.
 4. (1) The President shall be elected in accordance with the provisions
 of this Constitution and, subject thereto, to the provisions of any Act of
 Parliament for regulating the election of a President.
 (2) An election of a President shall be held whenever one of the following
 events occurs, that is to say:
 (a) Parliament is dissolved; or
 (b) the President dies; or
 (c) the President resigns his office without having first dissolved
 Parliament; or
 (d) where, in pursuance of section 7 of this Constitution, the Chief
 Justice has certified that the President is unable to discharge his
 functions and has not, within the succeeding period of six months,
 withdrawn such certificate.
 (3) Any citizen of Tanganyika who:
 (a) is qualified to be registered as a voter for the purposes of elections
 to the National Assembly;
 (b) has attained the age of thirty years; and
 (c) in the case of an election held on a dissolution of Parliament, is
 nominated by not less than one thousand persons registered as
 voters for the purposes of elections to the National Assembly,
 shall be qualified for election as President.
 (4) Where there is more than one qualified candidate for the office of
 President:
 (a) in the case of an election held on a dissolution of Parliament, the
 candidates for election to the National Assembly at the ensuing
 general election may, with the consent of the presidential candidate
 concerned, declare their preference for a presidential candidate,
 and the presidential candidate who obtains the preferences of more
 than one-half of the total number of the persons elected as members
 of the National Assembly at that general election shall be elected
 as President;
 (b) if, in the case of an election held on a dissolution of Parliament,
 no presidential candidate is elected in accordance with the provisions
  of paragraph (a) of this subsection, the persons elected as members
 of the National Assembly shall elect, by secret ballot, one of the
 presidential candidates who has obtained the preference of at least
 one person elected a member of the National Assembly at the general
 election to be President;
 (c) in the case of an election held in any other event, the election
 shall be determined by secret ballot of the elected members of the
 National Assembly;
 (d) where an election is to be determined by ballot:
 (i) the presidential candidate who obtains the votes of more than
 one-half of the total number of the persons entitled to vote at
 such ballot shall be elected President;
 (ii) where two ballots have been held and no candidate has
 obtained the votes of more than one-half of the total number
 of the persons entitled to vote thereat, the presidential candidate
 who, at a subsequent ballot, obtains the greatest number of votes
 east by the persons voting at such ballot shall be elected President.
 (5) The Chief Justice shall be the returning officer for the election
 of a President.
 (6) Where a person has been declared by the returning officer to be
 elected as President, his election shall not be questioned in any court.
 5. (1) The President shall assume office on the day following his
 election and shall, unless he sooner dies or resigns, continue in office
 until the person elected President at the next following presidential
 election assumes office.
 (2) Upon his assumption of office, the President shall take and subscribe
 the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office
 as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 6. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Part, Julius
 Kambarage Nyerere, having been elected in pursuance of the President
 Designate (Election) Act, 1962, shall be the first President of Tanganyika
 and shall assume the office of President on the ninth day of December, 1962.
 7. (1) Whenever the office of President is vacant, or the President is
 absent from Tanganyika, or the Chief Justice, acting in his discretion
 after receiving a resolution from the Cabinet requesting him to exercise
 his powers in that behalf and after considering medical evidence, certifies
 that the President is, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, unable
 to discharge the functions of his office, and has not subsequently withdrawn
 such certificate on the ground that the President has recovered his
 capacity:
 (a) the Vice-President; or
 (b) if the office of Vice-President is vacant or the Vice-President is
 absent from Tanganyika or is, by reason of physical or mental
 infirmity, unable to act:
  (i) some other Minister appointed by the President; or
 (ii) if the President has not made any such appointment or the
 Minister appointed is absent from Tanganyika or is, by reason
 of physical or mental infirmity, unable to act, some other Minister
 appointed by the Cabinet,
 shall discharge the functions of the office of President during the vacancy
 in the office, or the absence or incapacity, as the case may be, of the
 President or, in the case of a Minister other than the Vice-President,
 until the Vice-President or some other Minister having a prior right,
 under the provisions of this subsection, to discharge such functions is
 present and capable of discharging the same.
 (2) If the President dies or resigns his office, or is absent from Tanganyika, or if the Chief Justice, acting in his discretion after considering
 medical evidence, certifies that the President is, by reason of physical
 or mental infirmity, unable to discharge the functions of his office, at
 any time when the office of Vice-President is vacant, or the Vice-President
 is absent from Tanganyika or is unable by reason of physical or mental
 infirmity to act, and there are no other Ministers in the Cabinet or able
 to act for any such reason aforesaid:
 (a) the certificate of the Chief Justice shall have effect as if it had been
 preceded by a resolution of the Cabinet requesting him to exercise
 his powers in that behalf and shall not be questioned in any court
 not withstanding it was not preceded by such resolution; and
 (b) the Speaker of the National Assembly shall appoint a member of
 the National Assembly who appears to him likely to command
 the support of the majority of the members of the National Assembly,
 or if Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a member of the
 National Assembly immediately before such dissolution, to discharge
 the functions of the office of President during the vacancy in the
 office, or the absence or incapacity, as the case may be, of the
 President, or, if such an appointment is made during the absence
 of the Vice-President from Tanganyika or his incapacity, until the
 Vice-President is present and capable of discharging the functions
 of the office of President.
 (3) Whenever the President:
 (a) is absent from Dar es Salaam;
 (b) is absent from Tanganyika for a period which he believes will
 be of short duration; or
 (c) by reason of illness that he has reason to believe will be of short
 duration, considers it desirable so to do,
 he may, by directions in writing, appoint the Vice-President, or, if for
 any reason he considers it expedient so to do, any other Minister, to
 discharge, subject to such restrictions and exceptions as he may specify,
 the functions of the office of President during such absence or illness:
  Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as derogating from the power of the President contained in any other law to delegate any function to any other person.
 (4) For the purposes:
 (a) of subsections (1) and (2):
 (i) the President shall not be regarded as absent from Tanganyika
 by reason only of the fact that he is in passage from one part of
 Tanganyika to another, or where he has given a direction under
 subsection (3) and that direction is in force; and
 (ii) the certificate of the Chief Justice that the Vice-President
 or any other Minister is, by reason of physical or mental infirmity,
 unable to act, shall not be questioned in any court; and
 (b) of subsection (1), the Cabinet shall be deemed to be duly constituted notwithstanding any vacancy or the absence of any member, and
 a resolution of the majority of the members of the Cabinet shall be
 deemed to be a resolution of the Cabinet.
 (5) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a person
 discharging the functions of the office of President under this section
 shall not have power to remove the Vice-President from office.
 (6) The Vice-President, a Minister, a member of the National Assembly
 or other person shall not, by reason of his exercising the functions of
 the office of President under this section, vacate his seat in, or be disqualified for election to, the National Assembly.
 8. (1) The President shall receive such salary and allowances, and
 on retirement such pension, gratuity or allowance, as may be determined
 by the National Assembly, and such salary, allowances, pension or
 gratuity are hereby charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 (2) The salary and allowances of the President shall not be reduced
 during his period of office.
 9. (1) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or
 continued against the President while he is in office.
 (2) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President
 shall be instituted while he is in office in respect of anything done or not
 done, or purporting to have been done or not done, by him in his personal
 capacity, whether before or after he entered upon his office, unless, at
 least thirty days before the proceedings are instituted, notice in writing
 has been delivered to him, or sent to him in the manner prescribed by
 law, stating the nature of the proceedings, the cause of action, the name,
 description and place of residence of the party by whom the proceedings
 are to be instituted and the relief which he claims.
 
 Tanzania
 
 864
 
 
 Tanzania
 
 PART III
 THE EXECUTIVE
 10. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive
 power of the Republic may be exercised by the President, either directly
 or through persons holding office in the service of the Republic.
 (2) Nothing in this section or in section 3 of this Constitution shall
 prevent Parliament from conferring functions on persons or authorities
 other than the President.
 11. (1) There shall be a Vice-President of Tanganyika who shall be
 the principal assistant of the President in the discharge of his executive
 functions and the leader of Government business in the National Assembly.
 (2) There shall be such other offices of Minister as the President may,
 from time to time, by instrument under the Public Seal, establish.
 (3) The Vice-President and the other Ministers shall be responsible
 under the direction of the President for such departments of State or
 other business of the Government as the President may assign to them.
 12. The President may appoint junior ministers to assist Ministers in
 the performance of their functions.
 13. (1) The President shall appoint the Vice-President and the other
 Ministers, and the junior ministers, from among the members of the
 National Assembly:
 Provided that the Vice-President shall be appointed from among the
 elected members of the National Assembly.
 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), if occasion arises
 for making an appointment of a Vice-President or other Minister or of a
 junior minister while Parliament is dissolved, the President may appoint
 a person who was a member of the National Assembly immediately
 before such dissolution.
 14. The office of Vice-President, or other Minister, or of a junior
 minister, shall become vacant:
 (a) if the President removes the holder from office by instrument
 under the Public Seal; or
 (b) if the holder ceases to be a member of the National Assembly
 otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; or
 (c) on the acceptance by the President of his resignation by the holder
 of the office; or
 (d) immediately before the assumption of office of a President.
 15. (1) There shall be a Cabinet comprised of the Vice-President
 and the other Ministers, and at the meetings of which the President, or
 in his absence the Vice-President, or some other Minister appointed by
 the President, shall preside.
 (2) Subject to the powers of the President, the Cabinet shall be the
 principal instrument of policy and shall advise the President on such
 matters as may be referred to it under any general or special directions
 of the President.
 16. The Vice-President, any other Minister or a junior minister shall
 not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed
 the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office
 as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 17. There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet who shall have charge
 of the Cabinet Office, shall be responsible, in accordance with such
 instructions as may be given to him by the President, for arranging the
 business for, and keeping the minutes of, the Cabinet and for conveying
 the decisions of the Cabinet to the appropriate person or authority, and
 shall have such other functions as the President may from time to time
 direct.
 18. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of
 Parliament, the powers:
 (a) of constituting and abolishing offices in the service of the Republic;
 and
 (b) of making appointments to such offices, and of promotion, termi-
 nation of appointment, dismissal and disciplinary control of persons
 appointed to such offices,
 are vested in the President.
 19. (1) The President may:
 (a) grant to any person convicted of any offence a pardon, either free
 or subject to lawful conditions;
 (b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified
 period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person
 for any offence;
 (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment
 imposed on any person for any offence; and
 (d) remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any
 person for any offence or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise
 due to the Republic on account of any offence.
 (2) Parliament may make provision for regulating the manner in which
 the President shall exercise his functions under this section.
 PART IV
 THE LEGISLATURE
 20. (1) There shall be a Parliament which shall consist of the President
 and the National Assembly.
 (2) The legislative power of the Republic is vested in Parliament.
 (a) Composition of the National Assembly
 21. (1) The National Assembly shall consist of the following members,
 that is to say:
 (a) elected members elected in accordance with section 22 of this
 Constitution; and
 (b) until Parliament otherwise provides, nominated members
 appointed in accordance with section 23 of this Constitution.
 (2) The President shall not be a member of the National Assembly.
 22. (1) Until Parliament otherwise provides, there shall be one hundred
 and seven elected members of the National Assembly.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the elected members
 of the National Assembly shall be elected in such manner as may be
 prescribed by or under any law.
 23. The nominated members of the National Assembly shall consist
 of such members (whose number shall not exceed ten) as may be appointed
 by the President from among persons who are qualified for election as
 members of the National Assembly.
 24. (1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2) of this section and
 of section 25 of this Constitution, any person who:
 (a) is a citizen of Tanganyika; and
 (b) has attained the age of twenty-one years.
 shall be qualified for election as a member of the National Assembly,
 and no other person shall be so qualified.
 (2) Parliament may make provision for the nomination of candidates
 for election and for regulating elections to the National Assembly.
 25. (1) No person shall be qualified for election as a member of the
 National Assembly:
 (a) if he is under a declaration of allegiance to some country other
 than Tanganyika;
 (b) if, under any law in force in Tanganyika, he is adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind;
 (c) if:
 (i) he is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in
 Tanganyika or a sentence of imprisonment (by whatever name
 called) exceeding six months imposed on him by such a court; or
 (ii) he is detained under an order made under the Preventive
 Detention Act, 1962, and has been so detained under that order
 for a period exceeding six months; of
 (iii) he has been deported in accordance with the provisions of
 section 2 of the Deportation Ordinance, under an order made
 under that section which has been in force for a period exceeding
 six months, and is still in force;
  (d) if he is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or
 otherwise declared bankrupt under any.law in force in Tanganyika;
 (e) if he is not qualified to be registered as a voter for the purposes of
 elections to the National Assembly;
 (f) subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be prescribed
 by Parliament, if he has any such interest in any such government
 contract as may be so prescribed; or
 (g) subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be prescribed
 by Parliament, if he holds or acts in any office or appointment in
 the service of the Republic, other than an office to which the President
 is required to or may, by this Constitution, make appointments
 from members of the National Assembly, specified (either individually or by reference to a class of office or appointment) by Parliament.
 (2) No person shall be qualified for election as a member of the National
 Assembly at any general election at which he is a candidate for the
 office of President, or at any by-election while he holds the office of President.
 (3) Parliament may provide that a person who is the holder of or who
 acts in any office the functions of which involve responsibility for, or in
 connection with, the conduct of any election to the National Assembly
 or the compilation of any register of voters for the purposes of such an
 election shall not be qualified for election to the National Assembly:
 Provided that nothing in any such provision shall disqualify the Speaker
 for election or re-election to the National Assembly.
 (4) Parliament may provide that a person shall not be qualified for
 election to the National Assembly for such period (not exceeding five
 years) as may be prescribed by Parliament if he is convicted by any
 court of such offences connected with the election of members of the
 National Assembly as may be so prescribed.
 (5) Parliament may, in order to permit any person who has been
 adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, sentenced to death or
 imprisonment, adjudged or declared bankrupt or convicted of an offence
 prescribed under subsection (4) of this section to appeal against the
 decision in accordance with any law, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament, the decision shall not have
 effect for the purposes of subsection (1) or subsection (4) of this section
 until such time as may be so prescribed.
 (6) For the purposes of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section:
 (a) two or more sentences that are required to be served consecutively
 shall be regarded as separate sentences if none of them exceeds
 six months but if any one of them exceeds six months they shall
 be regarded as one sentence; and
 (b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment imposed
 as an alternative to, or in default of, the payment of a fine.
  (7) In Paragraph (f) of subsection (1) of this section, "government contract" means any contract made with the Republic, or with a department of State, or with an officer of the Republic contracting as such.
 '26. (1) Every citizen of Tanganyika who has attained the age of
 twenty-one years shall, unless he is disqualified by any Act of Parliament
 from registration as a voter for the purposes of elections to the National
 Assembly, be entitled to be registered as such a voter under a law in
 that behalf, and no other person may be so registered.
 (2) Every person who is registered as aforesaid in any constituency
 shall, unless he is disqualified by any Act of Parliament from voting in
 any election in that constituency to the National Assembly, be entitled
 so to vote, in accordance with the provisions of any law in that behalf,
 and no other person may so vote.
 27. (1) A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat therein:
 (a) if he ceases to be a citizen of Tanganyika; or
 (b) if he is elected President; or
 (c) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the
 National Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified for election
 as such under subsection (1) of section 25 of this Constitution or
 under any law enacted in pursuance of subsection (3) or subsection
 (4) of that section; or
 (d) in the case of a nominated member, if his appointment is revoked
 by the President.
 (2) Parliament may, in order to permit any member of the National
 Assembly who has been adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind,
 sentenced to death or imprisonment, adjudged or declared bankrupt or
 convicted of any offence prescribed under subsection (4) of section 25
 of this Constitution to appeal against the decision in accordance with
 any law, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed
 by Parliament, the decision shall not have effect for the purposes of this
 section until such time as may be so prescribed.
 28. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly who shall
 be elected by the members of the National Assembly from among persons
 who are members of the National Assembly or who are qualified to be
 elected as such.
 (2) A Minister, a junior minister or the holder of any other office
 prescribed by Parliament for the purposes of this section shall not be
 qualified to be elected as Speaker.
 (3) The Speaker shall vacate his office:
 (a) if, having been elected from among the members of the National
 Assembly, he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly
 otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament;
 (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would
 disqualify him for election as such;
  (c) subject to the provisions of subsection (5) of section 44 of this
 Constitution, when the National Assembly first meets after any
 dissolution of Parliament; or
 (d) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the National
 Assembly supported by the votes of not less than two thirds of all
 the members thereof.
 (4) No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly (other
 than an election to the office of Speaker) at any time when the office
 of Speaker is vacant.
 29. (1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly
 who shall be elected by the members of the National Assembly from
 among persons who are members of the National Assembly other than
 Ministers, junior ministers or the holder of any other office prescribed
 by Parliament for the purposes of this section.
 (2) The members of the National Assembly shall elect a person to
 the office of Deputy Speaker:
 (a) when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution of
 Parliament; and
 (b) at the first of the National Assembly after the office of Deputy
 Speaker has become vacant otherwise than by reason of a dissolution
 of Parliament,
 or as soon thereafter as may be convenient.
 (3) The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office:
 (a) if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly;
 (b) if any other circumstances arise that, if he were not Deputy
 Speaker, would disqualify him for election as such; or
 (c) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the National
 Assembly.
 30. In any election of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, the votes of the
 members of the National Assembly shall be given by ballot in such
 manner as not to disclose how any particular member votes.
 31. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall consist of:
 (a) the Speaker, who shall be Chairman; and
 (b) not less than three nor more than five appointed members who
 shall be appointed by the President.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified to be an appointed member of
 the Commission if he is a Minister, a junior minister, the holder of any
 office prescribed by Parliament for the purposes of this section, a member
 of the National Assembly or the holder of any office (other than the office
 of Clerk or Clerk-Assistant of the National Assembly) specified by Parliament under the provisions of paragraph (g) of subsection (1) of section 25
 of this Constitution.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this section, the office of an appointed
 member of the Electoral Commission shall become vacant:
 (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment; or
 (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the
 Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment
 as such.
 (4) An appointed member of the Electoral Commission may be removed
 from office by the President only for inability to discharge the functions
 of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any
 other cause) or for misbehavior.
 (5) The Electoral Commission may act notwithstanding any vacancy
 or the absence of any member:
 Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof.
 (6) In the exercise of its functions the Electoral Commission shall
 not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.
 (7) The question whether the Electoral Commission has validly
 performed any function vested in it by this Constitution shall not be
 inquired into in any court.
 32. (1) Tanganyika shall be divided into constituencies for the purposes
 of elections to the National Assembly so that:
 (a) the number of such constituencies shall correspond with the
 number of seats in the National Assembly (excluding the seats
 of nominated members); and
 (b) the boundaries of such constituencies shall be such as the Electoral
 Commission, acting with the approval of the National Assembly
 signified by resolution, may prescribe.
 (2) Each constituency shall return one member to the National As-
 sembly.
 (3) The boundaries of each constituency shall be such that the number
 of inhabitants thereof is as nearly equal to the population quota as is
 reasonably practicable:
 Provided that the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be
 greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of
 means of communication, geographical features and the difference
 between urban and rural areas in respect of density of population.
 (4) The Electoral Commission shall review the division of Tanganyika
 into constituencies at intervals of not less than eight nor more than ten
 years and may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, alter the
 constituencies to such extent as it considers desirable in the light of the
 review:
 Provided that the Commission shall carry out such a review and, in
 accordance with the provisions of this section, alter the constituencies
 whenever Parliament has made provision altering the number of seats
 in the National Assembly (other than the seats of nominated members);
 and, in addition, the Commission may at any time carry out such a review
 and, in accordance with the provisions of this section, alter the constituencies to such extent as it considers desirable in consequence of the
 holding of a census of the population in pursuance of any law.
 (5) Any provision by Parliament altering the number of seats in the
 National Assembly (other than the seats of nominated members) shall
 come into effect when the alteration of the constituencies that, in accordance with the provisions of subsection (4) of this section, is consequential thereon, comes into effect; and any alteration of the constituencies shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament after the alteration has been approved by the National Assembly.
 (6) In this section "the population quota" means the number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants of Tanganyika by the number of constituencies into which Tanganyika is to be divided under this section.
 (7) For the purposes of this section the number of inhabitants of
 Tanganyika shall be ascertained by reference to the latest census of the
 population held in pursuance of any law.
 (8) The registration of voters and the conduct of elections in every
 constituency shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the
 Electoral Commission.
 33. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine
 any question whether:
 (a) any person has been validly elected or appointed as a member
 of the National Assembly; or
 (b) the seat in the National Assembly of a member thereof has
 become vacant:
 Provided that where the Chief Justice, in the exercise of his powers
 under subsection (6) of section 4 of this Constitution, has declared any
 member of the National Assembly to have been elected President, the
 High Court shall not inquire further into any question in relation to the
 vacation of such member's seat.
 (2) Parliament may make provision with respect to:
 (a) the persons who may apply to the High Court for the determination of any question under this section;
 (b) the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon
 which any such application may be made; and
 (c) the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in relation
 to any such application.
 (3) The determination by the High Court of any question under this
 section shall not be subject to appeal.
 (b) Legislation and Procedure in National Assembly
 34. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the legislative
 power of Parliament shall be exercised by Bills passed by the National
 Assembly and assented to by the President, and a Bill shall not become
 law unless it is so passed and assented to.
 (2) When a Bill is presented to the President for assent, he shall either
 assent to the Bill or withhold his assent and return the Bill to the National
 Assembly with a message stating the reasons why he has withheld his
 assent.
 (3) A Bill returned to the National Assembly under this section shall
 not be presented to the President for his assent a second time within six
 months of its being so returned, unless it is supported in the National
 Assembly at the last stage before it is again presented by the votes of
 not less than two thirds of all the members of the Assembly.
 (4) When a Bill which has been returned to the National Assembly
 and has thereafter been supported in the National Assembly in the
 manner specified in subsection (3) of this section by the votes of not less
 than two thirds of all the members of the Assembly, is presented to the
 President for assent a second time within six months of its being so
 returned, the President shall, unless he has first dissolved Parliament,
 assent to the Bill within twenty one days of its presentation.
 (5) Nothing in this section or in section 20 of this Constitution shall
 prevent Parliament from conferring on any person or authority he
 power to make provisions having the force of law or from conferring the
 force of law on any provision made by any person or authority.
 35. (1) Parliament may alter any of the provisions of this Constitution, but a Bill for an Act to alter any provision of this Constitution or
 any of the provisions of the laws set out in the Schedule to this Constitution
 shall not be passed by the National Assembly unless it is supported by
 the votes of not less than two thirds of all the members of the Assembly
 at not less than two of its stages in the Assembly.
 (2) In this section references to the alteration of any provision of this
 Constitution or of a law set out in the Schedule include references to the
 amendment, modification or re-enactment, with or without amendment
 or modification, of that provision, the suspension or repeal of that pro-
 vision and the making of different provision in lieu of that provision.
 36. Except upon the recommendation of the President signified by a
 Minister, the National Assembly shall not:
 (a) proceed upon any Bill (including any amendment to a Bill) that,
 in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any
 of the following purposes:
 (i) for the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation
 otherwise than by reduction;
  (ii) for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Fund
 or any other public fund or the alteration of any such charge
 otherwise than by reduction;
 (iii) for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated
 Fund or any other public fund of any moneys not charged thereon
 or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal;
 or
 (iv) for the composition or remission of any debt due to the
 Republic; or
 (b) proceed upon any Motion (including any amendment to a Motion)
 the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would
 be to make provision for any of those purposes:
 Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a Bill or an amend-
 ment to a Bill introduced by, or a Motion or an amendment to a Motion
 moved by, a Minister or a junior minister.
 37. The President may at any time address the National Assembly in
 person or by message which shall be read by a Minister.
 38. (1) Every member of the National Assembly shall, before taking
 his seat therein, take and subscribe before the National Assembly the
 oath of allegiance, but a member may before taking that oath take
 part in the election of a President or of a Speaker.
 (2) Any person elected to the office of Speaker who is not a member
 of the National Assembly shall, before entering upon the duties of his
 office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the National
 Assembly.
 39. There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly:
 (a) the Speaker; or
 (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or
 (c) in the absence of the Speaker and of the Deputy Speaker, such
 member of the National Assembly (not being a Minister, a junior
 minister or the holder of any other office prescribed by Parliament
 for the purposes of this section) as the National Assembly may elect
 for that purpose.
 40. If objection is taken by any member of the National Assembly
 present, that there are present in the National Assembly (besides the
 person presiding) less than one fourth of all the members of the National
 Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of
 procedure of the National Assembly, the person presiding ascertains
 that the number of persons present is still less than one fourth of all the
 members of the National Assembly, he shall thereupon adjourn the
 National Assembly.
 41. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any question
 proposed for decision in the National Assembly shall be determined by
 a majority of the votes of the members present and voting.
  (2) The person presiding in the National Assembly shall cast a vote
 whenever there would otherwise be an equality of votes but shall not
 vote in any other case.
 (3) The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may make pro-
 vision under which a member who votes upon a question in which he
 has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted.
 42. Any person who sits or votes in the National Assembly knowing
 or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not entitled to do so
 shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding four hundred shillings or such
 other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament for each day on which
 he so sits or votes in the National Assembly, which shall be recoverable
 by action in the High Court at the suit of the Attorney-General.
 43. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National
 Assembly may regulate its own procedure.
 (2) The National Assembly may act notwithstanding any vacancy in
 its membership (including any vacancy not filled when the National
 Assembly first meets after any dissolution of Parliament) and the presence
 or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate
 in the proceedings of the National Assembly shall not invalidate those
 proceedings.
 (c) Summoning and Dissolution of Parliament and Meetings
 of the National Assembly
 44. (1) When Parliament has been dissolved, the President shall
 summon a new Parliament to meet within twenty one days after the
 results have been declared in the general election following such dis-
 solution in all the constituencies other than those in which the election
 has been countermanded and commenced de novo, or within twenty one
 days after the election of a President which is consequent upon such
 dissolution, whichever is the later.
 (2) The President may at any time dissolve Parliament.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section, Parliament,
 unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date for
 which it is first summoned after any dissolution and shall then stand
 dissolved.
 (4) At any time when Tanganyika is at war, Parliament may from
 time to time extend the period of five years specified in subsection (3)
 of this section for not more than twelve months at a time:
 Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this
 subsection for more than five years.
 (5) If an emergency arises or exists which in the opinion of the President
 necessitates the summoning of a Parliament at a time when Parliament
 stands dissolved, and before the majority of results have been declared
  in the general election following the dissolution, he may, by Proclamation,
 summon Parliament and cause the persons who were the Speaker and
 members of the National Assembly immediately before such dissolution
 to be summoned. to such Parliament and, until midnight on the day on
 which such majority of results are declared, such persons shall be deemed
 to be the Speaker and members respectively of, and to constitute, the
 National Assembly.
 45. (1) Meetings of the National Assembly shall be held at such
 place as is customary for the holding of such meetings or at such other
 place in Tanganyika as the President may appoint.
 (2) The first meeting of the National Assembly in a Parliament shall
 commence on the date for which Parliament is summoned, and each
 succeeding meeting shall commence on such date as the National Assembly
 shall appoint:
 Provided that the President may at any time summon a meeting of
 the National Assembly.
 PART V
 THE JUDICATURE
 (a) The High Court
 46. (1) There shall be a High Court which shall have such jurisdiction
 and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other
 law.
 (2) The judges of the High Court shall be the Chief Justice and such
 number of other judges, not being less than seven (hereinafter referred
 to as "the puisne judges") as may be prescribed by Parliament:
 Provided that the office of a puisne judge shall not be abolished while
 there is a substantive holder thereof.
 (3) The High Court shall be a superior court of record and, save as
 otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a
 court.
 47. (1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the President.
 (2) The puisne judges shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice.
 (3) (a) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court unless:
 (i) he is, or has been, a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or in any country outside the Commonwealth that may be prescribed by Parliament, or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court; or
 (ii) he holds one of the specified qualifications and has held
 one or other of those qualifications for a total period of not less
 than five years.
 (b) In this subsection "the specified qualifications" means the
 professional qualifications specified by the Advocates Ordinance (or
 by or under any law amending or replacing that Ordinance) one of
 which must be held by any person before he may apply under that
 Ordinance (or under any such law) to be admitted as an advocate
 in Tanganyika.
 (4) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant or if the Chief Justice is
 for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a
 person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that
 office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions,
 as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the
 puisne judges as may be designated in that behalf by the President.
 (5) If the office of any puisne judge is vacant or if any such judge is
 appointed to act as Chief Justice or is for any reason unable to perform
 the functions of his office or if the Chief Justice advises the President
 that the state of business in the High Court so requires, the President
 may appoint a person qualified for appointment as a judge of the High
 Court to act as a puisne judge of that Court:
 Provided that, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of
 section 48 of this Constitution, no person shall be disqualified for ap-
 pointment under this subsection by reason only of his age.
 (6) Any person appointed under subsection (5) of this section to act
 as a puisne judge shall continue to act for the period of his appointment
 or, if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the
 President:
 Provided that, notwithstanding the expiration of the period of his
 appointment or the revocation of his appointment, he may thereafter
 continue to act as a puisne judge for so long as may be necessary to
 enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to
 proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto.
 48. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the
 office of a judge of the High Court shall vacate that office on attaining
 the age of sixty two years:
 Provided that the President may permit such a person to continue in
 office until he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
 (2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at which he is
 required by the provisions of this section to vacate his office, a person
 holding the office of a judge of the High Court may continue in office
 for so long after attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to
 deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that
 were commenced before him before he attained that age.
  (3) A judge of the High Court may be removed from office only for
 inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from
 infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for misbehavior,
 and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of
 subsection (5) of this section.
 (4) If the President considers that the question of removing a judge
 under this section ought to be investigated, then:
 (a) he shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a chairman and
 not less than two other members, who hold or have held office as
 judges of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal
 matters in some part of the Commonwealth or in any country
 outside the Commonwealth that may be prescribed by Parliament,
 or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court;
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts
 thereof to the President and advise the President whether the
 judge ought to be removed from office under this section for inability
 as aforesaid or for misbehavior.
 (5) Where a tribunal appointed under subsection (4) advises the President that a judge ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid
 or misbehavior, the President shall remove such judge from office.
 (6) If the question of removing a judge from office has been referred
 to a tribunal under subsection (4) of this section, the President may
 suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office, and any
 such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall
 in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President
 that the judge ought not be removed from office.
 (7) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the
 provisions of subsection (6) of section 47 of this Constitution.
 49. A judge of the High Court shall not enter upon the duties of
 his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and
 such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by
 Parliament.
 (b) Interpretation of the Constitution and Appeals
 50. (1) An appeal shall lie as of right direct to a full bench of the
 High Court from final decisions of any court or judge in Tanganyika
 on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution, and a decision
 of a full bench of the High Court on any such question shall be final and
 no appeal shall lie therefrom to any other court.
 (2) Parliament may make provision:
 (a) regulating appeals to a full bench of the High Court;
 (b) for the reservation or reference to a full bench of the High Court,
 of questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution.
  (3) In this section a full bench of the High Court means a court comprised of not less than five judges of the High Court.
 51. (1) Parliament may make provision for appeals to lie from decisions of the High Court or of a magistrate to another court in East
 Africa in cases other than questions as to the interpretation of this
 Constitution.
 (2) The provisions of this section shall be subject to the provisions of
 subsection (3) of section 83 of this Constitution.
 (8) Parliament may make provision regulation the circumstances
 and manner in which and the conditions on which appeals under this
 section shall be prosecuted.
 (c) Appointment of Judicial Officers and the Judicial
 Service Commission
 52. (1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission which shall
 consist of :
 (a) the Chief Justice, who shall be Chairman;
 (b) such puisne judge as may for the time being be designated in that
 behalf by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice;
 (c) a member appointed by the President.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed under the provisions
 of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section if he is a member of the
 National Assembly, the holder of an office prescribed by Parliament for
 the purposes of section 31 of this Constitution or the holder of any office
 specified by Parliament under the provisions of paragraph (g) of subsection
 (1) of section 25 of this Constitution.
 53. (1) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the power:
 (a) to appoint persons to hold offices to which this section applies
 (including the power of confirming appointments and promotions)
 is vested in the President;
 (b) to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting
 in such offices, to terminate appointments and to remove such
 persons from office, is vested in the Judicial Service Commission.
 (2) The offices to which this section applies are the offices of Registrar
 of the High Court, Deputy Registrar of the High Court, Resident Magistrate and any magistrate and such other offices connected with any
 court (other than a court-martial) as, subject to the provisions of this
 Constitution, may be prescribed by Parliament:
 Provided that this section shall not apply to the office of magistrate
 in relation to any person who may be appointed to that office by virtue
 of his being an administrative officer.
 (3) The power of the President to abolish offices in the service of the
 Republic shall not be exercised in respect of any office to which this
 section applies while there is a substantive holder of that office, unless
 the Judicial Service Commission concurs in such abolition.
 PART VI
 FINANCE
 54. No taxation shall be imposed otherwise than by or under the
 authority of an Act of Parliament or by or under the authority of a
 provision upon which Parliament has conferred the force of law.
 55. All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purposes
 of the Republic (not being revenues or other moneys payable by or
 under any law for some other purpose or into some other fund established
 for a specific purpose) shall be plaid into and form one Consolidated Fund.
 56. (1) No moneys shall' be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund
 except:
 (a) to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this
 Constitution or by any other law; or
 (b) where the issue of those moneys has been authorized by an
 Appropriation Act or by an Act enacted in pursuance of section 58
 of this Constitution.
 (2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund other than
 the Consolidated Fund unless the issue of those moneys has been authorized by or under any law.
 (3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless
 such withdrawal has been approved by the Controller and Auditor-General and except in the manner prescribed by Parliament.
 57. (1) The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before the
 National Assembly in each financial year estimates of the revenues and
 expenditure of the Republic for the next following financial year.
 (2) When the estimates of expenditure (other than expenditure charged
 upon the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or by any other law)
 have been approved by the National Assembly, a Bill, to be known as
 an Appropriation Bill, shall be introduced into the National Assembly,
 providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary
 to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums, under
 separate votes for the several services required, for the purposes specified
 therein.
 (3) If in respect of any financial year it is found:
 (a) that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act for
 any purpose is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure
 for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that
 Act; or
 (b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess
 
 Tanzania
 
 880
 
 
 of the amount appropriated for that purpose by the Appropriation
 Act of for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated
 by that Act,
 a supplementary estimate or, as the case may be, a statement of excess
 showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National
 Assembly and, when the supplementary estimate or the statement of
 excess has been approved, a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be
 introduced into the National Assembly, providing for the issue of such
 sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them for the purposes
 specified therein.
 58. Parliament may make provision under which, if the Appropriation
 Act in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the
 beginning of that financial year, the President may authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting
 expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until
 the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year
 or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the
 earlier.
 59. (1) Parliament may make provision for the establishment of a
 Contingencies Fund and for authorizing the President or a Minister
 appointed by him, if satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make
 advances from that Fund to meet that need.
 (2) Where any advance is made from the Contingencies Fund, a
 supplementary estimate shall be presented for approval by the National
 Assembly and a Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced
 as soon as possible for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced.
 60. (1) The public debt shall be secured on the Consolidated Fund.
 (2) For the purposes of this section, the public debt includes the
 interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt
 and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management of
 that debt.
 61. (1) There shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this
 section applies such salary and such allowances as may be prescribed by
 Parliament.
 (2) The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of the
 offices to which this section applies, and where any such holder is appointed on terms by which he is entitled to a pension or gratuity, such pension or gratuity shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
 (3) The salary payable to the holder of any office to which this section
 applies and his terms of office, other than allowances, shall not be altered
 to his disadvantage after his appointment.
 (4) Where a person's salary or terms of office depend upon his option,
 the salary or terms for which he opts shall, for the purposes of subsection
 
 Tanzania
 
 881
 
 
 (3) of this section, be deemed to be more advantageous to him than any
 others for which he might have opted.
 (5) This section applies to the offices of Judge of the High Court and
 Controller and Auditor-General.
 62. (1) There shall be a Controller and Auditor-General.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Controller and Auditor-General:
 (a) to satisfy himself that any proposed withdrawal from the
 Consolidated Fund is authorized by, or as provided by, section 56 of
 this Constitution, and, if so satisfied, to approve such withdrawal;
 (b) to satisfy himself that all moneys that have been appropriated
 by Parliament and disbursed have been applied to the purposes
 for which they were so appropriated and that the expenditure
 conforms to the authority that governs it; and
 (c) at least once in every year to audit and report on the public
 accounts of the Republic, the accounts of all officers and authorities
 of the Government, the accounts of all courts of Tanganyika (other
 than courts no part of the expenses of which are paid directly out
 of moneys provided by Parliament) and the accounts of the Clerk
 of the National Assembly.
 (3) The Controller and Auditor-General and any officer authorized
 by him shall have access to all books, records, returns, reports and
 other documents relating to any of the accounts referred to in subsection
 (2) of this section.
 (4) The Controller and Auditor-General shall submit every report
 made by him in pursuance of subsection (2) of this section to the President
 who shall, not later than seven days after the first sitting of the National
 Assembly next after the receipt of such report, cause it to be laid before
 the National Assembly; and if the President makes default in laying the
 report before the National Assembly, the Controller and Auditor-General
 shall submit the report to the Speaker of the National Assembly (or,
 if the office of Speaker is vacant or if the Speaker is for any reason unable
 to perform the functions of his office, to the Deputy Speaker) who shall
 cause it to be laid before the National Assembly.
 (5) The Controller and Auditor-General shall perform such other
 duties and exercise such other powers in relation to the public accounts
 of the Republic or the accounts of other public authorities or other bodies
 as may be prescribed by or under any law.
 (6) In the exercise of his functions under subsections (2), (3) and (4)
 of this section, the Controller and Auditor-General shall not be subject
 to the direction or control of any other person or authority:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as precluding a court from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question
 whether the Controller and Auditor-General has performed those functions
 in accordance with this Constitution.
 
 Tanzania
 
 882
 
 
 63. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding
 the office of Controller and Auditor-General shall vacate that office
 when he attains the age of sixty years or such other age as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (2) A person holding the office of Controller and Auditor-General
 may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions
 of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any
 other cause) or for misbehavior and shall not be so removed except in
 accordance with the provisions of subsection (4) of this section.
 (3) If the President considers that the question of removing the Controller and Auditor-General under this section ought to be investigated,
 then:
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a
 chairman and not less than two other members, who hold or have
 held office as judges of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil
 and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or in
 any country outside the Commonwealth that may be prescribed
 by Parliament or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any
 such court; and
 (b) that tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts
 thereof to the President and recommend to him whether the Controller and Auditor-General ought to be removed under this section
 for inability as aforesaid or misbehavior.
 (4) Where a tribunal appointed under subsection (3) advises the
 President that the Controller and Auditor-General ought to be removed
 from office for inability as aforesaid or misbehavior, the President shall
 remove him from office.
 (5) If the question of removing the Controller and Auditor-General
 has been referred to a tribunal under this section, the President may
 suspend the Controller and Auditor-General from performing the functions
 of his office and any such suspension may at anytime be revoked by the
 President and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the President that the Controller and Auditor-General should
 not be removed.
 (6) A person who holds or has held the office of Controller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible for appointment to or to act in any other
 office in the service of the Republic.
 (7) Nothing in this section shall apply to any person appointed to
 act in the office of Controller and Auditor-General.
 
 Tanzania
 
 883
 
 
 Tanzania
 
 PART VII
 THE ARMED FORCES
 64. No person shall raise or maintain any military, naval or air forces
 in Tanganyika except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 65. (1) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the powers
 of the President as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the
 Republic shall include the power to order any such forces to engage in
 operations for the defence of Tanganyika, for the preservation of public
 order, for relief in cases of emergency and for any other purposes, whether
 within or outside Tanganyika, appearing to the Commander-in-Chief
 to be expedient.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the power to
 commission officers in the Armed Forces of the Republic, to terminate
 the appointment of and dismiss any member of such Armed Forces and
 to appoint members of the Armed Forces to commands, and the power
 to order a member of the Armed Forces not to exercise any authority
 conferred on him as such, is vested in the Commander-in-Chief.
 (3) A purported exercise of any authority in contravention of any
 such order as aforesaid shall be void.
 PART VIII
 MISCELLANEOUS
 66. (1) Any person who is appointed, elected or otherwise selected
 to any office established by this Constitution (including the office of
 Minister or junior minister) may resign from that office by writing under
 his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed,
 elected or selected:
 Provided that:
 (a) in the case of a person who holds office as President, his resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Chief Justice;
 (b) in the case of a person who holds office as Speaker or Deputy
 Speaker of the National Assembly, his resignation from that office
 shall be addressed to the National Assembly; and
 (c) in the case of a member of the National Assembly, his resignation
 from that Assembly shall be addressed to the Speaker.
 (2) The resignation of any person from any such office as aforesaid
 shall take effect when the writing signifying the resignation is received
 by the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by any person
 authorized by that person or authority to receive it, unless it is stated in
 
 884
 
 
 such writing that it is to take effect at a later date in which case it shall
 take effect at such later date.
 (3) Where any person has vacated any office established by the
 Constitution (including the office of Minister or junior minister), he may,
 if qualified, again be appointed, elected or otherwise selected to hold that
 office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent a person who
 holds office as President from being re-elected to that office during his
 tenure thereof.
 67. (1) The powers conferred by this Constitution to make appointments to offices in the service of the Republic shall include the power to
 appoint persons to act in or to perform the functions of such offices:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to any Minister,
 junior minister, judge of the High Court, or member of the Electoral
 Commission.
 (2) Where a power is conferred by this Constitution:
 (a) upon any person or authority to make any appointment to any
 office, a person may be appointed to the office notwithstanding
 that some other person may be holding that office, when that other
 person is on leave of absence pending the relinquishment of the
 office; and where two or more persons are holding the same office
 by reason of an appointment made in pursuance of this paragraph,
 then, for the purposes of any function conferred on the holder of that
 office, the person last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder
 of that office;
 (b) upon any person or authority to appoint any person to act in or
 perform the functions of any office if the holder thereof is himself
 unable to perform those functions, no such appointment shall be
 called in question on the ground that the holder of the office was
 not unable to perform those functions.
 68. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires:
 "the Commonwealth" means Tanganyika, any country to which
 section 7 of the Citizenship Act, 1961, applies and any dependency of any
 such country;
 "law" includes any provision that has the force of law;
 "Minister" includes the Vice-President but does not include a junior
 minister;
 "oath" includes affirmation;
 "oath of allegiance" means such oath of allegiance to the Republic as
 may be prescribed by Parliament;
 "office in the service of the Republic" includes membership of the armed
 forces of the Republic and of a police force established by law.
 (2) In this Constitution, references to the functions of the office of
 President shall be construed as references to his powers and duties in the exercise of the executive power of the Republic and to any other powers
 and duties conferred or imposed on the President by this Constitution
 or by any other law.
 (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered as holding an office in the service of the Republic by reason only
 of the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in
 respect of service under, or in the armed or police forces of, the Republic
 or any former Government of Tanganyika.
 (4) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, a
 reference to the holder of an office by the term designating his office
 shall be construed as including a reference to any person for the time
 being lawfully acting in or performing the functions of that office.
 (5) References in this Constitution to the power to remove the holder
 of an office in the service of the Republic from his office shall be construed
 as including references to any power conferred by any law to require or
 permit that officer to retire from the service of the Republic:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as confer-
 ring on any person or authority power to require a judge of the High
 Court or the Controller and Auditor-General to retire from his office.
 (6) Any reference in this Constitution to a law that amends or replaces
 any other law shall be construed as including a reference to a law that
 modifies, re-enacts, with or without amendment or modification, or
 makes different provision in lieu of that other law.
 69. This Act may be cited as the Constitution of Tanganyika and shall
 come into operation on the ninth day of December, 1962.

</pre>
