<pre>
 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
 THE PREAMBLE
 WE THE PEOPLE OF UGANDA:
 RECALLING our history which has been characterised by political
 and constitutional instability;
 RECOGNISING our struggles against the forces of tyranny, oppres-
 sion and exploitation;
 COMMITTED to building a better future by establishing a socio-
 economic and political order through a popular and durable
 national Constitution based on the principles of unity, peace,
 equality, democracy, freedom, social justice and progress;
 EXERCISING our sovereign and inalienable right to determine the
 form of governance for our country, and having fully participat-
 ed in the Constitution-making process;
 NOTING that a Constituent Assembly was established to represent
 us and to debate the Draft Constitution prepared by the Uganda
 Constitutional Commission and to adopt and enact a Constitution
 for Uganda:
 Do HEREBY, in and through this Constituent Assembly solemnly
 adopt, enact and give to ourselves and our posterity, this
 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, this 22nd day of
 September, in the year 1995.
 FOR GOD AND MY COUNTRY
 
 
 NATIONAL OBJECTIVES AND DIRECTIVE
 PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
 General.
 I.    Implementation of objectives.
 (i) The following objectives and principles shall guide all
 organs and agencies of the State, all citizens, organisations and
 other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the
 Constitution or any other law and in taking and implementing
 any policy decisions for the establishment and promotion of a
 just, free and democratic society.
 (ii) The President shall report to Parliament and the nation
 at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realisation of
 these policy objectives and principles.
 Political Objectives.
 II.   Democratic principles.
 (i) The State shall be based on democratic principles which
 empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at
 all levels in their own governance.
 (ii) All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership
 positions at all levels, subject to the Constitution.
 (iii) The State shall be guided by the principle of decentra-
 lisation and devolution of governmental functions and powers to
 the people at appropriate levels where they can best manage and
 direct their own affairs.
 (iv) The composition of Government shall be broadly repre-
 sentative of the national charactei and social diversity of the
 country.
 (v) All political and civic associations aspiring to manage
 and direct public affairs shall conform to deimocratic principles
 in their internal organisations and practice.
 
 
 (vi) Civic organisations shall retain their autonomy in pur-
 suit of their declared objectives.
 HI.    National unity and stability.
 (i) All organs of State and people of Uganda shall work
 towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability.
 (ii) Every effort shall be made to integrate all the peoples of
 Uganda while at the same time recognising the existence of their
 ethnic, religious, ideological, political and cultural diversity.
 (iii) Everything shall be done to promote a culture of co-
 operation, understanding, appreciation, tolerance and respect for
 each other's customs, traditions and beliefs.
 (iv) There shall be established and nurtured institutions
 and procedures for the resolution of conflicts fairly and peace-
 fully.
 (v) The State shall provide a peaceful, secure and stable
 political environment which is necessary for economic develop-
 ment.
 IV. National sovereignty, independence and territorial interity.
 (i) The State and citizens of Uganda shall at all times
 defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
 Uganda.
 (ii) The State and citizens of Uganda shall endeavour to
 build national strength in political, economic and social
 spheres to avoid undue dependence on other countries and
 institutions.
 (iii) The State shall endeavour to mobilise, organise and
 empower the Ugandan people to build independent and sustain-
 able foundations for the development of Uganda.
 3
 
 
 Protection and Promotion of Fundamental and other Human
 Rights and Freedoms.
 V.    Fundamental and other human rights and freedoms.
 (i) The State shall guarantee and respect institutions which
 are charged by the State with responsibility for protecting and
 promoting human rights by providing them with adequate
 resources to function effectively.
 (ii) The State shall guarantee and respect the independence
 of non-governmental organisations which protect and promote
 human rights.
 VI.   Gender balance and fair representation of marginalised
 groups.
 The State shall ensure gender balance and fair representation
 of marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies.
 VII.  Protection of the aged.
 The State shall make reasonable provision for the welfare
 and maintenance of the aged.
 VIII. Provision of adequate resources for organs of government.
 The distribution of powers and functions as well as checks
 and balances provided for in the Constitution among various
 organs and institutions of government shall be supported through
 the provision of adequate resources for their effective functioning
 at all levels.
 IX.   The right to development.
 In order to facilitate rapid and equitable development, the
 State shall encourage private initiative and self-reliance.
 
 
 X.    Role of the people in development.
 
 The State shall take all necessary steps to involve the people
 in the formulation and implementation of development plans
 and programmes which affect them.
 XI.   Role of the State in development.
 (i) The State shall give the highest priority to the enactment
 of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance
 the right of the people to equal opportunities in development.
 (ii) The State shall stimulate agricultural, industrial, techno-
 logical and scientific development by adopting appropriate policies
 and the enactment of enabling legislation.
 (iii) In furtherance of social justice, the State may regulate
 the acquisition, ownership, use and disposition of land and other
 property, in accordance with the Constitution.
 XII.  Balanced and equitable development,
 (i) The State shall adopt an integrated and co-ordinated plan-
 ning approach.
 (ii) The State shall take necessary measures to bring about
 balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and
 between the rural and urban areas.
 (iii) The State shall take special measures in favour of the
 development of the least developed areas.
 XIII. Protection of natural resources.
 The State shall protect important natural resources, including
 land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of
 the people of Uganda.
 
 
 Social and Economic Objectives.
 
 XIV. General social and economic objectives.
 The State shall endeavour to fulfil the fundamental rights of
 all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and
 shall, in particular, ensure that-
 (a) all developmental efforts are directed at ensuring the
 maximum social and cultural well-being of the
 people; and
 (b) all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and
 access to education, health services, clean and safe
 water, work, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food
 security and pension and retirement benefits.
 XV.   Recognition of role of women in society.
 The State shall recognise the significant role that women play
 in society.
 XVI. Recognition of the dignity of persons with disabilities.
 Society and the State shall recognise the right of persons with
 disabilities to respect and human dignity.
 XVII. Recreation and sports.
 The State shall promote recreation and sports for the citi-
 zens of Uganda.
 XVHII. Educational objectives.
 (i) The State shall promote free and compulsory basic
 education.
 (ii) The State shall take appropriate measures to afford every
 citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational
 standard possible.
 
 
 (iii) Individuals, religious bodies and other non-governmental
 organisations shall be free to found and operate educational
 institutions if they comply with the general educational policy
 of the country and maintain national standards.
 XIX. Protection of the family.
 The family is the natural and basic unit of society and is
 entitled to protection by society and the State.
 XX.   Medical services.
 The State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provi-
 sion of basic medical services to the population.
 XXI. Clean and safe water.
 The State shall take all practical measures to promote a good
 water management system at all levels.
 XXII. Food security and nutrition.
 The State shall-
 (a) take appropriate steps to encourage people to grow
 and store adequate food;
 (b) establish national food reserves; and
 (c) encourage and promote proper nutrition through mass
 education and other appropriate means in order to
 build a healthy State.
 XXIII. Natural disasters.
 The State shall institute an effective machinery for dealing
 with any hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or
 any situation resulting in general displacement of people or
 serious disruption of their normal life.
 
 
 Cultural Objectives.
 
 XXIV. Cultural objectives.
 Cultural and customary values which are consistent with
 fundamental rights and freedoms, human dignity, democracy,
 and with the Constitution may be developed and incorporated in
 aspects of Ugandan life.
 The State shall-
 (a) promote and preserve those cultural values and practices
 which enhance the dignity and well-being of
 Ugandans;
 (b) encourage the development, preservation and enrich-
 ment of all Ugandan languages;
 (c) promote the development of a sign language for the
 deaf; and
 (d) encourage the development of a national language or
 languages.
 XXV. Preservation of public property and heritage.
 The State and citizens shall endeavour to preserve and protect
 and generally promote, the culture of preservation of public
 property and Uganda's heritage.
 Accountability.
 XXVI. Accountability.
 (i) All public offices shall be held in trust for the people.
 (ii) All persons placed in positions of leadership and respon-
 sibility shall, in their work, be answerable to the people.
 (iii) All lawful measures shall be taken to expose, combat and
 eradicate corruption and abuse or misuse of power by those
 holding political and other public offices.
 
 
 The Environment.
 
 XXVII.       The Environment.
 (i) The State shall promote sustainable development and
 public awareness of the need to manage land, air, water
 resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present
 and future generations.
 (ii) The utilization of the natural resources of Uganda shall be
 managed in such a way as to meet the development and environ-
 mental needs of present and future generations of Ugandans; and
 in particular, the State shall take all possible measures to prevent
 or minimise damage and destruction to land, air and water
 resources resulting from pollution or other causes.
 (iii) The State shall promote and implement energy policies
 that will ensure that people's basic needs and those of environ-
 mental preservation are met.
 (iv) The State, including local governments, shall-
 (a) create and develop parks, reserves and recreation
 areas and ensure the conservation of natural
 resources;
 (b) promote the rational use of natural resources so as to
 safeguard and protect the bio-diversity of Uganda.
 Foreign Policy Objectives.
 XXVIII. Foreign policy objectives.
 (i) The foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the
 principles of-
 (a) promotion of the national interest of Uganda;
 (b) respect for international law and treaty obligations;
 
 
 (c) peaceful co-existence and non-alignment;
 
 (d) settlement of international disputes by peaceful
 means;
 (e) opposition to all forms of domination, racism and
 other forms of oppression and exploitation.
 (ii) Uganda shall actively participate in international and
 regional organisations that stand for peace and for the well-being
 and progress of humanity.
 (iii) The State shall promote regional and pan-African cultur-
 al, economic and political co-operation and integration.
 Duties of a Citizen.
 XXIX. Duties of a Citizen.
 The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is insep-
 arable from the performance of duties and obligations, and
 accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen-
 (a) to be patriotic and loyal to Uganda and to promote its
 well-being;
 (b) to engage in gainful work for the good of that citizen,
 the family, the common good and to contribute to
 national development;
 (c) to contribute to the well-being of the community
 where that citizen lives;
 (d) to promote responsible parenthood;
 (e) to foster national unity and live in harmony with others;
 09 to promote democracy and the rule of law; and
 (g) to acquaint himself or herself with the provisions of
 the Constitution and to uphold and defend the
 Constitution and the law.
 
 
 CHAPTER ONE
 
 THE CONSTITUTION
 1. (1) All power belongs to the people who shall exercise  Sovereignty
 their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution.    of the
 people.
 (2) Without limiting the effect of clause (1) of this article,
 all authority in the State emanates from the people of Uganda;
 and the people shall be governed through their will and consent.
 (3) All power and authority of Government and its organs
 derive from this Constitution, which in turn derives its authority
 from the people who consent to be governed in accordance with
 this Constitution.
 (4) The people shall express their will and consent on
 who shall govern them and how they should be governed,
 through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or
 through referenda.
 2. (1) This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and  Supremacy
 shall have binding force on all authorities and persons through- of the
 Constitution.
 out Uganda.
 (2) If any other law or any custom is inconsistent with
 any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall
 prevail, and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the
 inconsistency, be void.
 3. (1) It is prohibited for any person or group of persons to  Defence of
 take or retain control of the Government of Uganda, except in the
 Constitution.
 accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
 (2) Any person who, singly or in concert with others, by
 any violent or other unlawful means, suspends, overthrows,
 abrogates or amends this Constitution or any part of it or
 attempts to do any such act, commits the offence of treason and
 shall be punished according to law.
 
 
 (3) This Constitution shall not lose its force and effect
 even where its observance is interrupted by a government estab-
 lished by the force of arms; and in any case, as soon as the people
 recover their liberty, its observance shall be re-established and all
 persons who have taken part in any rebellion or other activity
 which resulted in the interruption of the observance, shall be
 tried in accordance with this Constitution and other laws consistent
 with it.
 (4) All citizens of Uganda shall have the right and duty at
 all times-
 (a) to defend this Constitution, and in particular, to resist
 any person or group of persons seeking to over-
 throw the established constitutional order; and
 (b) to do all in their power to restore this Constitution after
 it has been suspended, overthrown, abrogated or
 amended contrary to its provisions.
 (5) Any person or group of persons who, as required by
 clause (4) of this article, resists the suspension, overthrow,
 abrogation or amendment of this Constitution commits no
 offence.
 (6) Where a person referred to in clause (5) of this article
 is punished for any act done under that clause, the punishment
 shall, on the restoration of this Constitution, be considered void
 from the time it was imposed and that person shall be taken to be
 absolved from all liabilities arising out of the punishment.
 Promotion     4. The State shall promote public awareness of this
 of public  Constitution by-
 awareness
 Constitution.   (a) translating it into Ugandan languages and dissemi-
 nating it as widely as possible; and
 (b) providing for the teaching of the Constitution in all
 educational institutions and armed forces training
 institutions and regularly transmitting and pub-
 lishing programmes through the media generally.
 
 
 CHAPTER TWO
 
 THE REPUBLIC
 5. (1) Uganda is one Sovereign State and a Republic.   The
 Republic of
 Uganda.
 (2) Uganda shall consist of the districts specified in the
 First Schedule to this Constitution and such other districts as
 may be established in accordance with this Constitution or any
 other law consistent with it.
 (3) The territorial boundary of Uganda shall be as
 delineated in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 (4) The capital of Uganda is Kampala.
 6. (1) The official language of Uganda is English.     Official
 language.
 (2) Subject to clause (1) of this article, any other language
 may be used as a medium of instruction in schools or other
 educational institutions or for legislative, administrative or
 judicial purposes as may be prescribed by law.
 7. Uganda shall not adopt a State religion.            Non-
 adoption
 of State
 religion.
 8. The National Flag, the National Coat of Arms, the Public National
 Seal, the National Anthem and the seals of the Courts of symbols
 and seals.
 Judicature in use immediately before the coming into force of
 this Constitution, shall continue to be in use.
 
 
 CHAPTER THREE
 
 CITIZENSHIP
 Citizens of  9. Every person who, on the commencement of this
 Uganda.  Constitution, is a citizen of Uganda shall continue to be such a
 citizen.
 Citizenship  10. The following persons shall be citizens of Uganda by
 by birth.  birth-
 (a) every person born in Uganda one of whose parents or
 grandparents is or was a member of any of the
 indigenous communities existing and residing within
 the borders of Uganda as at the first day of February,
 1926 and set out in the Third Schedule to this
 Constitution; and
 (b) every person born in or outside Uganda one of whose
 parents or grandparents was at the time of birth of
 that person a citizen of Uganda by birth.
 Foundlings  11. (1) A child of not more than five years of age found in
 and adopted Uganda, whose parents are not known, shall be presumed to be a
 children,  citizen of Uganda by birth.
 (2) A child under the age of eighteen years neither of
 whose parents is a citizen of Uganda, who is adopted by a citi-
 zen of Uganda shall, on application, be registered as a citizen of
 Uganda.
 Citizenship  12. (1) Every person born in Uganda-
 by registra-
 tion.          (a) at the time of whose birth-
 (i) neither of his or her parents and none of his or her
 grandparents had diplomatic status in Uganda;
 and
 
 
 (ii) neither of his or her parents and none of his or her
 grandparents was a refugee in Uganda; and
 (b) who has lived continuously in Uganda since the ninth
 day of October, 1962,
 shall, on application, be entitled to be registered as a citizen of
 Uganda.
 (2) The following persons shall, upon application, be
 registered as citizens of Uganda-
 (a) every person married to a Uganda citizen upon proof
 of a legal and subsisting marriage of three years or
 such other period prescribed by Parliament;
 (b) every person who has legally and voluntarily migrated
 to and has been living in Uganda for at least ten years
 or such other period prescribed by Parliament;
 (c) every person who, on the commencement of this
 Constitution, has lived in Uganda for at least twenty
 years.
 (3) Paragraph (a) of clause (2) of this article applies also
 to a person who was married to a citizen of Uganda who, but for
 his or her death, would have continued to be a citizen of Uganda
 under this Constitution.
 (4) Where a person has been registered as a citizen of
 Uganda under paragraph (a) of clause (2) of this article and the
 marriage by virtue of which that person was registered is-.
 (a) annulled or otherwise declared void by a court or
 tribunal of competent jurisdiction; or
 (b) dissolved,
 that person siall, unless he or she renounces that citizenship,
 continue to be a citizen of Uganda.
 
 
 Citizenship  13. Parliament shall by law provide for the acquisition and
 by naturali-
 sation.  loss of citizenship by naturalisation.
 Loss of citi-  14. A person may be deprived of his or her citizenship if
 zenship by  acquired by registration, on any of the following grounds-
 registration.
 (a) voluntary acquisition of the citizenship of another
 country;
 (b) voluntary service in the armed forces or security
 forces of a country hostile to, or at war with
 Uganda;
 (c) acquisition of Uganda citizenship by fraud, deceit,
 bribery, or having made intentional and deliberate
 false statements in his or her application for citizen-
 ship; and
 (d) espionage against Uganda.
 Prohibition  15. (1) Subject to this article, a Uganda citizen shall not hold
 ofdual  the citizenship of another country concurrently with his or her
 citizenship.
 Uganda citizenship.
 (2) A citizen of Uganda shall cease forthwith to be a cit-
 izen of Uganda if, on attaining the age of eighteen years he or
 she, by voluntary act other than marriage, acquires or retains the
 citizenship of a country other than Uganda.
 (3) A person who--
 (a) becomes a citizen of Uganda by registration, and
 (b) upon becoming a citizen of Uganda, is also a citizen
 of another country,
 shall cease to be a citizen of Uganda unless he or she has -
 (i) renounced his or her citizenship of that other
 country;
 
 
 (ii) taken the oath of allegiance specified in the
 Fourth Schedule to this Constitution;
 (iii) made and registered such declaration of his or
 her intentions concerning residence as may be
 prescribed by law; or,
 (iv) obtained an extension of time for taking those
 steps and the extended period has not expired.
 (4) A Uganda citizen who loses his or her Uganda citizen-
 ship as a result of the acquisition or possession of the citizenship
 of another country shall, on the renunciation of his or her citizen-
 ship of that other country, become a citizen of Uganda.
 (5) Where the law of a country, other than Uganda,
 requires a person who marries a citizen of that country to renounce
 the citizenship of his or her own country by virtue of that marriage,
 a citizen of Uganda who is deprived of his or her citizenship by
 virtue of that marriage shall, on the dissolution of that marriage, if
 he or she thereby loses his or her citizenship acquired by that
 marriage, become a citizen of Uganda.
 16. (1) There shall be a National Citizenship and Immigration  National
 Board.                                                     Citizenship
 and
 lmniigralon
 (2) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and not less Board.
 than four other persons, each of whom shall be of high moral
 character and proven integrity, appointed by the President with
 the approval of Parliament.
 (3) The functions of the Board shall be prescribed by
 Parliament and shall include,-,
 (a) registering and issuing national identity cards to
 citizens;
 (b) issuing Uganda passports and other travel documents;
 
 
 (c) granting and cancelling citizenship by registration and
 naturalisation;
 (d) granting and cancelling immigration permits; and
 (e) registering and issuing identity cards to aliens.
 (4) The functions of the Board set out in paragraphs (a), (b)
 and (d) of clause (3) of this article, may be decentralised to the dis-
 trict level.
 Duties of    17. (1) It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda-
 a citizen.
 (a) to respect the national anthem, flag, coat of arms and
 currency;
 (b) to respect the rights and freedoms of others;
 (c) to protect children and vulnerable persons against any
 form of abuse, harassment or ill-treatment;
 (d) to protect and preserve public property;
 (e) to defend Uganda and to render national service when
 necessary;
 (f) to co-operate with lawful agencies in the maintenance
 of law and order;
 (g) to pay taxes;
 (h) to register for electoral and other lawful purposes;
 (i) to combat corruption and misuse or wastage of public
 property; and
 (j) to create and protect a clean and healthy environment.
 (2) It is the duty of all able-bodied citizens to undergo
 military training for the defence of this Constitution and the pro-
 tection of the territorial integrity of Uganda whenever called
 upon to do so; and the State shall ensure that facilities are avail-
 able for such training.
 
 
 18. The State shall register every birth, marriage and death  Registration
 occurring in Uganda.                                          marnages
 and deaths.
 19. (1) A reference in this Chapter to the citizenship of the  Citizenship
 parent of a person at the time of the birth of that person shall, in  of parent
 dying,
 relation to a person born after the death of the parent, be con- before birth
 strued as a reference to the citizenship of the parent at the time  of person.
 of the parent's death.
 (2) For the purposes of clause (1) of this article, where
 the death occurred before the coming into force of this
 Constitution, the citizenship that the parent would have had if he
 or she had died on the coming into force of this Constitution,
 shall be taken to be his or her citizenship at the time of his or her
 death.
 
 
 CHAPTER FOUR
 
 PROTECTION AND PROMOTION OF FUNDAMENTAL
 AND OTHER HUMAN RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS
 General.
 Fundamental  20. (1) Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual
 and other  are inherent and not granted by the State.
 human
 rights and
 freedoms.       (2) The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups
 enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted
 by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.
 Equality     21. (1) All persons are equal before and under the law in all
 and freedom  spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in
 frimion  every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law.
 (2) Without prejudice to clause (1) of this article, a person
 shall not be discriminated against on the ground of sex, race,
 colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, or social or
 economic standing, political opinion or disability.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, "discriminate" means
 to give different treatment to different persons attributable only
 or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, colour,
 ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, or social or econom-
 ic standing, political opinion or disability.
 (4) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from
 enacting laws that are necessary for-
 (a) implementing policies and programmes aimed at
 redressing social, economic or educational or other
 imbalance in society; or
 (b) making such provision as is required or authorised to
 be made under this Constitution; or
 
 
 (c) providing for any matter acceptable and demonstrably
 justified in a free and democratic society.
 (5) Nothing shall be taken to be inconsistent with this
 article which is allowed to be done under any provision of this
 Constitution.
 22. (1) No person shall be deprived of life intentionally Protection
 except in execution of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court ofightto
 life.
 of competent jurisdiction in respect of a criminal offence under the
 laws of Uganda and the conviction and sentence have been
 confirmed by the highest appellate court.
 (2) No person has the right to terminate the life of an
 unborn child except as may be authorised by law.
 23. (1) No person shall be deprived of personal liberty except Protection
 in any of the following cases-                          of iersonal
 liberty.
 (a) in execution of the sentence or order of a court,
 whether established for Uganda or another country
 or of an international court or tribunal in respect of
 a criminal offence of which that person has been
 convicted; or of an order of a court punishing the
 person for contempt of court;
 (b) in execution of the order of a court made to secure
 the fulfilment of any obligation imposed on that
 person by law;
 (c) for the purpose of bringing that person before a court
 in execution of the order of a court or upon reason-
 able suspicion that that person has committed or is
 about to commit a criminal offence under the laws
 of Uganda;
 (d) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an
 infectious or contagious disease;
 
 
 (e) in the case of a person who has not attained the age of
 eighteen years, for the purpose of the education or
 welfare of that person;
 (f) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably sus-
 pected to be, of unsound mind or addicted to drugs
 or alcohol, for the purpose of the care or treatment
 of that person or..the protection of the community;
 (g) for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of
 that person into Uganda, or for the purpose of
 effecting the expulsion, extradition or other lawful
 removal of that person from Uganda or for the pur-
 pose of restricting that person while being con-
 veyed through Uganda in the course of the extradi-
 tion or removal of that person as a convicted pris-
 oner from one country to another, or
 (h) as may be authorised by law, in any other circum-
 stances similar to any of the cases specified in para-
 graphs (a) to (g) of this clause.
 (2) A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be kept
 in a place authorised by law.
 (3) A person arrested, restricted or detained shall be
 informed immediately, in a language that the person understands,
 of the reasons for the arrest, restriction or detention and of his or
 her right to a lawyer of his or her choice.
 (4) A person arrested or detained-
 (a) for the purpose of bringing him or her before a court
 in execution of an order of a court; or
 (b) upon reasonable suspicion of his or her having com-
 mitted or being about to commit a criminal offence
 under the laws of Uganda,
 22
 
 
 shall, if not earlier released, be brought to court as soon as pos-
 sible but in any case not later than forty-eight hours frcm the
 time of his or her arrest.
 (5) Where a person is restricted or detained-
 (a) the next-of-kin of that person shall, at the request of
 that person, be informed as soon as practicable of
 the restriction or detention;
 (b) the next-of-kin, lawyer and personal doctor of that
 person shall be allowed reasonable access to that
 person; and
 (c) that person shall be allowed access to medical treat-
 ment including, at the request and at the cost of that
 person, access to private medical treatment.
 (6) Where a person is arrested in respect of a criminal
 offence-
 (a) the person is entitled to apply to the court to be
 released on bail and the court may grant that person
 bail on such conditions as the court considers
 reasonable;
 (b) in the case of an offence which is triable by the High
 Court as well as by a subordinate court, the person
 shall be released on bail on such conditions as the
 court considers reasonable, if that person has been
 remanded in custody in respect of the offence
 before trial for one hundred and twenty days;
 (c) in the case of an offence triable only by the High
 Court, the person shall be released on bail on such
 conditions as the court considers reasonable, if the
 person has been remanded in custody for three
 hundred and sixty days before the case is -committed
 to the High Court.
 
 
 (7) A person unlawfully arrested, restricted or detained
 by any other person or authority, shall be entitled to compensa-
 tion from that other person or authority whether it is the State or
 an agency of the State or other person or authority.
 (8) Where a person is convicted and sentenced to a term
 of imprisonment for an offence, any period he or she spends in
 lawful custody in respect of the offence before the completion of
 his or her trial shall be taken into account in imposing the term
 of imprisonment.
 (9) The right to an order of habeas corpus shall be invio-
 lable and shall not be suspended.
 Respect for  24. No person shall be subjected to any form of torture, cruel,
 human
 dignity and  inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 protection
 from
 inhuman
 treatment.
 Protection   25. (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude.
 from
 slavery,
 servitude       (2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour.
 and forced
 labour.         (3) For the purposes of this article, "forced labour" does
 not include-
 (a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or
 order of a court;
 (b) any labour required of any person while that person is
 lawfully detained which, though not required in
 consequence of the sentence or order of a court, is
 reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or
 for the maintenance of the place at which the person
 is detained;
 (c) any labour required of a member of a disciplined force
 as part of that member's duties as such or, in the case
 of a' person who has conscientious objections to ser-
 vice as a member of a naval, military or air force,
 any labour which that person is required by law to
 perform in place of that service;
 
 
 (d) any labour required during any period when Uganda
 is at war or in case of any emergency or calamity
 which threatens the life and well-being of the
 community, to the extent that the :equiring of the
 labour is reasonably justifiable in the circum-
 stances of any situation arising or existing during
 the period or as a result of the emergency or
 calamity, for the purpose of dealing with that situa-
 tion; or
 (e) any labour reasonably required as part of reasonable
 and normal communal or other civic obligations.
 26. (1) Every person has a right to own property either Protection
 individually or in association with others.                 from depri-
 vation of
 property.
 (2) No person shall be compulsorily deprived of property
 or any interest in or right over property of any description except
 where the following conditions are satisfied-
 (a) the taking of possession or acquisition is necessary for
 public use or in the interest of defence, public safety,
 public order, public morality or public health; and
 (b) the compulsory taking of possession or acquisition of
 property is made under a law which makes provision
 for-
 (i) prompt payment of fair and adequate compensa-
 tion, prior to the taking of possession or
 acquisition of the property; and
 (ii) a right of access to a court of law by any person
 who has an interest or right over the property.
 27. (1) No person shall be subjected to-                 Right to
 privacy of
 person,
 (a) unlawful search of the person, home or other property  home and
 other
 of that person; or                               property.
 
 
 (b) unlawful entry by others of the premises of that person.
 
 (2) No person shall be subjected to interference with the
 privacy of that person's home, correspondence, communication
 or other property.
 Right to a   28. (1) In the determination of civil rights and obligations or
 fair hearing. any criminal charge, a person shall be entitled to a fair, speedy
 and public hearing before an independent and impartial court or
 tribunal established by law.
 (2) Nothing in clause (1) of this article shall prevent the
 court or tribunal from excluding the press or the public from all or
 any proceedings before it for reasons of morality, public order or
 national security, as may be necessary in a free and democratic
 society.
 (3) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence
 shall-
 (a) be presumed to be innocent until proved guilty or until
 that person has pleaded guilty;
 (b) be informed immediately, in a language that the per-
 son understands of the nature of the offence;
 (c) be given adequate time and facilities for the prepara-
 tion of his or her defence;
 (d) be permitted to appear before the court in person or, at
 that person's own expense, by a lawyer of his or
 her choice;
 (e) in the case of any offence which carries a sentence of
 death or imprisonment for life, be entitled to legal
 representation at the expense of the State;
 09 be afforded, without payment by that person, the assis-
 tance of an interpreter if that person cannot under-
 stand the language used at the trial;
 
 
 (g) be afforded facilities to examine witnesses and to
 obtain the attendance of other witnesses before the
 court.
 (4) Nothing done under the authority of any law shall be
 held to be inconsistent with-
 (a) paragraph (a) of clause (3) of this article, to the extent
 that the law in question imposes upon any person
 charged with a criminal offence, the burden of
 proving particular facts;
 (b) paragraph (g) of clause (3) of this article, to the extent
 that the law imposes conditions that must be satis-
 fied if witnesses called to testify on behalf of an
 accused are to be paid their expenses out of public
 funds.
 (5) Except with his or her consent, the trial of any person
 shall not take place in the absence of that person unless the per-
 son so conducts himself or herself as to render the continuance
 of the proceedings in the presence of that person impracticable
 and the court makes an order for the person to be removed and
 the trial to proceed in the absence of that person.
 (6) A person tried for any criminal offence, or any person
 authorised by him or her, shall, after the judgment in respect of
 that offence, be entitled to a copy of the proceedings upon pay-
 ment of a fee prescribed by law.
 (7) No person shall be charged with or convicted of a
 criminal offence which is founded on an act or omission that did
 not at the time it took place constitute a criminal offence.
 (8) No penalty shall be imposed for a criminal offence
 that is severer in degree or description than the maximum penalty
 that could have been imposed for that offence at the time when it
 was committed.
 
 
 (9) A person who shows that he or she has been tried by
 a competent court for a criminal offence and convicted or acquit-
 ted of that offence, shall not again be tried for the offence or for
 any other criminal offence of which he or she could have been
 convicted at the trial for that offence, except upon the order of a
 superior court in the course of appeal or review proceedings
 relating to the conviction or acquittal.
 (10) No person shall be tried for a criminal offence if the
 person shows that he or she has been pardoned in respect of that
 offence.
 (11) Where a person is being tried for a criminal offence,
 neither that person nor the spouse of that person shall be com-
 pelled to give evidence against that person.
 (12) Except for contempt of court, no person shall be
 convicted of a criminal offence unless the offence is defined and
 the penalty for it prescribed by law.
 Protection  29. (1) Every person shall have the right to-
 of freedom
 conscience.     (a) freedom  of speech and expression, which shall
 expression,         include freedom of the press and other media;
 movement,
 religion,
 assembly       (b) freedom of thought, conscience and belief which shall
 and associa-
 tion.                include academic freedom in institutions of learning;
 (c) freedom to practise any religion and manifest such
 practice which shall include the right to belong to
 and participate in the practices of any religious
 body or organisation in a manner consistent with
 this Constitution;
 (d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with
 others peacefully and unarmed and to petition; and
 
 
 (e) freedom of association which shall include the freedom
 to form and join associations or unions, including
 trade unions and political and other civic organisa-
 tions.
 (2) Every Ugandan shall have the right-
 (a) to move freely throughout Uganda and to reside and
 settle in any part of Uganda;
 (b) to enter, leave and return to, Uganda; and
 (c) to a passport or other travel document.
 30. All persons have a right to education.              Right to
 education.
 31. (1) Men and women of the age of eighteen years and  Rights of
 above, have the right to marry and to found a family and are the family.
 entitled to equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at its
 dissolution.
 (2) Parliament shall make appropriate laws for the pro-
 tection of the rights of widows and widowers to inherit the
 property of their deceased spouses and to enjoy parental rights
 over their children.
 (3) Marriage shall be entered into with the free consent of
 the man and woman intending to marry.
 (4) It is the right and duty of parents to care for and bring
 up their children.
 (5) Children may not be separated from their families or
 the persons entitled to bring them up against the will of their
 families or of those persons, except in accordance with the law.
 32. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Affirmative
 State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups margina- action in
 favour of
 lised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason margi-
 created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of alised
 redressing imbalances which exist against them.             POPS
 
 
 (2) Parliament shall make relevant laws, including laws
 for the establishment of an equal opportunities commission, for
 the purpose of giving full effect to clause (1) of this article.
 Rights of    33. (1) Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the
 women.    person with men.
 (2) The State shall provide the facilities and opportunities
 necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to
 realise their full potential and advancement.
 (3) The State shall protect women and their rights, taking
 into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in
 society.
 (4) Women shall have the right to equal treatment with
 men and that right shall include equal opportunities in political,
 economic and social activities.
 (5) Without prejudice to article 32 of this Consti-
 tution,women shall have the right to affirmative action for the
 purpose of redressing the imbalances created by history, tradition
 or custom.
 (6) Laws, cultures, customs or traditions which are
 against the dignity, welfare or interest of women or which
 undermine their status, are prohibited by this Constitution.
 Rights of    34. (1) Subject to laws enacted in their best interests, children
 childmn,  shall have the right to know and be cared for by their parents or
 those entitled by law to bring them up.
 (2) A child is entitled to basic education which shall be
 the responsibility of the State and the parents of the child.
 (3) No child shall be deprived by any person of medical
 treatment, education or any other social or economic benefit by
 reason of religious or other beliefs.
 
 
 (4) Children are entitled to be protected from social or
 economic exploitation and shall not be employed in or required
 to perform work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with
 their education or to be harmful to their health or physical,
 mental, spiritual, moral or social development.
 (5) For the purposes of clause (4) of this article, children
 shall be persons under the age of sixteen years.
 (6) A child offender who is kept in lawful custody or
 detention shall be kept separately from adult offenders.
 (7) The law shall accord special protection to orphans
 and other vulnerable children.
 35. (1) Persons with disabilities have a right to respect and  Rights of
 human dignity and the State and society shall take appropriate persons
 with disabi-
 measures to ensure that they realise their full mental and physical lities.
 potential.
 (2) Parliament shall enact laws appropriate for the pro-
 tection of persons with disabilities.
 36. Minorities have a right to participate in decision-making  protection
 processes and their views and interests shall be taken into account of rights of
 minorities.
 in the making of national plans and programmes.
 37. Every person has a right as applicable, to belong to, enjoy, Right to
 practise, profess, maintain and promote any culture, cultural insti- cultu and
 I                      similar
 tution, language, tradition, creed or religion in community with rights.
 others.
 38. (1) Every Uganda citizen has the right to participate in the  civic rights
 affairs of government, individually or through his or her repre- and
 sentatives in accordance with law.                            activities.
 (2) Every Ugandan has a right to participate in peaceful
 activities to influence the policies of government through civic
 organisations.
 
 
 Right to a  39. Every Ugandan has a right to a clean and healthy envi-
 clean and
 healthy  ronment.
 environ-
 mient.
 Economic    40. (1) Parliament shall enact laws-
 rights.
 (a) to provide for the right of persons to work under
 satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions;
 (b) to ensure equal payment for equal work without
 discrimination; and
 (c) to ensure that every worker is accorded rest and rea-
 sonable working hours and periods of holidays with
 pay, as well as remuneration for public holidays.
 (2) Every person in Uganda has the right to practise his
 or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation, trade or
 business.
 (3) Every worker has a right-
 (a) to form or join a trade union of his or her choice for
 the promotion and protection of his or her economic
 and social interests;
 (b) to collective bargaining and representation; and
 (c) to withdraw his or her labour according to law.
 (4) The employer of every woman worker shall accord
 her protection during pregnancy and after birth, in accordance
 with the law.
 Right of    41. (1) Every citizen has a right of access to information in
 acess to  the possession of the State or any other organ or agency of the
 State except where the release of the information is likely to
 prejudice the security or sovereignty of the State or interfere
 with the right to the privacy of any other person.
 
 
 (2) Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of
 information referred to in clause (1) of this article and the proce-
 dure for obtaining access to that information.
 42. Any person appearing before any administrative official Right to
 or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have just and fair
 treatment in
 a right to apply to a court of law in respect of any administrative  administra-
 decision taken against him or her.                                tive deci-
 sions.
 43. (1) In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed  General
 in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other limitation
 on funda-
 human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest,       mental and
 other human
 (2) Public interest under this article shall not permit-  rights and
 freedoms.
 (a) political persecution;
 (b) detention without trial;
 (c) any limitation of the enjoyment of the rights and free-
 doms prescribed by this Chapter beyond what is
 acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free
 and democratic society, or what is provided in this
 Constitution.
 44. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, there shall Prohibition
 be no derogation from the enjoyment of the following rights and   of deroga-
 freedoms-                                                         particular
 human
 (a) freedom  from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading     rights and
 treatment or punishment;                             fredos
 (b) freedom from slavery or servitude;
 (c) the right to fair hearing;
 (d) the right to an order of habeas corpus.
 45. The rights, duties, decla~ations and guarantees relating to  Human
 the fundamental and other human rights and freedoms specifi-      rights and
 freedoms
 cally mentioned in this Chapter shall not be regarded as excluding  additiona to
 others not specifically mentioned,                                other rights.
 
 
 Human Rights and Freedoms During a State of Emergency.
 
 Effect of    46. (1) An Act of Parliament shall not be taken to contravene
 laws      the rights and freedoms guaranteed in this Chapter, if that Act
 enacted for
 state of  authorises the taking of measures that are reasonably justifiable
 emergency.  for dealing with a state of emergency.
 (2) The provisions of any enactment other than an Act of
 Parliament dealing with a state of emergency declared under this
 Constitution shall apply only to that part of Uganda where the
 emergency exists.
 (3) Without prejudice to clause (1) of this article, an Act
 enacted in accordance with that clause may make provision for
 the detention of persons where necessary for the purposes of
 dealing with the emergency.
 Detention    47. Where a person is restricted or detained under a law made
 under     for the purpose of a state of emergency, the following provisions
 emergency
 laws.     shall apply-
 (a) he or she shall, within twenty-four hours after the
 commencement of the restriction or detention, be
 furnished with a statement in writing specifying the
 grounds upon which he or she is restricted or
 detained;
 (b) the spouse or next-of-kin of or other person named by
 the person restricted or detained shall be informed
 of the restriction or detention and allowed access to
 the person within seventy-two hours after the com-
 mencement of the restriction or detention;
 (c) not more than thirty days after the commencement of
 his or her restriction or detention, a notification
 shall be published in the Gazette and in the media
 stating that he or she has been restricted or detained
 and giving particulars of the provisions of the law
 under which his or her restriction or detention is
 authorised and the grounds of his or her restriction
 or detention.
 
 
 48. (1) The Uganda Human Rights Commission shall review  Review by
 Uganda
 the case of a person who is restricted or detained and to whom  Human
 article 47 of this Constitution applies, not later than twenty-one Rights
 Commi-
 days after the commencement of the restriction or detention, and Comi
 after that, at intervals of not more than thirty days.
 (2) A person who is restricted or detained shall be permitted
 and afforded every possible facility-
 (a) to consult a lawyer of his or her choice or any group
 of persons who shall be permitted to make represe-
 ntations to the Uganda Human Rights Commission
 for the review of his or her case;
 (b) to appear in person or by a lawyer of his or her choice
 at the hearing or review of his or her case.
 (3) On a review of the case, the Uganda Human Rights
 Commission may order the release of that person, or uphold the
 grounds of the restriction or detention.
 49. (1) In every month in which there is a sitting of Report to
 Parliament, the Minister responsible shall make a report to Parliament.
 Parliament in respect of-
 (a) the number of persons restricted or detained under the
 state of emergency; and
 (b) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the
 Uganda Human Rights Commission.
 (2) The Minister responsible shall publish every month in
 the Gazette and in the media-
 (a) the number and names and addresses of the persons
 restricted or detained;
 (b) the number of cases reviewed by the Uganda Human
 Rights Commission; and
 
 
 (c) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the
 Uganda Human Rights Commission.
 (3) For the avoidance of doubt, it is declared that at the
 end of the emergency declared under this Constitution, any person
 in or under restriction, detention or custody as a result of the
 declaration of emergency, shall be released immediately, unless
 charged with a criminal offence in a court of law.
 Enforcement of Rights and Freedoms by Courts.
 Enforcement  50. (1) Any person who claims that a fundamental or other
 of rights  right or freedom guaranteed under this Constitution has been
 and free-
 doms by  infringed or threatened, is entitled to apply to a competent court
 courts.  for redress which may include compensation.
 (2) Any person or organisation may bring an action
 against the violation of another person's or group's human rights.
 (3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the court
 may appeal to the appropriate court.
 (4) Parliament shall make laws for the enforcement of the
 rights and freedoms under this Chapter.
 Uganda Human Rights Commission.
 Uganda      51. (1) There shall be a Commission called the Uganda
 Huian   Human Rights Commission.
 Rights
 Commi-
 ssion.         (2) The Commission shall be composed of a Chairperson
 and not less than three other persons appointed by the President
 with the approval of Parliament.
 (3) The Chairperson of the Commission shall be a Judge
 of the High Court or a person qualified to hold that office.
 (4) The Chairperson and members of the Commission
 shall be persons of high moral character and proven integrity
 and shall serve for a period of six years and be eligible for re-
 appointment.
 
 
 52. (1) The Commission shall have the following functions-  Functions
 of Human
 Rights
 (a) to investigate, at its own initiative or on a complaint Commn-
 made by any person or group of persons against the ssO.
 violation of any human right;
 (b) to visit jails, prisons, and places of detention or related
 facilities with a view to assessing and inspecting con-
 ditions of the inmates and make recommendations;
 (c) to establish a continuing programme of research, edu-
 cation and information to enhance respect of human
 rights;
 (d) to recommend to Parliament effective measures to
 promote human rights, including provision of
 compensation to victims of violations of human
 rights, or their families;
 (e) to create and sustain within society the awareness of
 the provisions of this Constitution as the fundamental
 law of the people of Uganda;
 (f) to educate and encourage the public to defend this
 Constitution at all times against all forms of abuse
 and violation;
 (g) to formulate, implement and oversee programmes
 intended to inculcate in the citizens of Uganda
 awareness of their civic responsibilities and an
 appreciation of their rights and obligations as free
 people;
 (h) to monitor the Government's compliance with inter-
 national treaty and convention obligations on
 human rights; and
 (i) to perform such other functions as may be provided by
 law.
 
 
 (2) The Uganda Human Rights Commission shall publish
 periodical reports on its findings and submit annual reports to
 Parliament on the state of human rights and freedoms in the
 country.
 (3) In the performance of its functions, the Uganda
 Human Rights Commission shall-
 (a) establish its operational guidelines and rules of
 procedure;
 (b) request the assistance of any department, bureau,
 office, agency or person in the performance of its
 functions; and
 (c) observe the rules of natural justice.
 Powers of   53. (1) In the performance of its functions, the Commission
 t Commi- shall have the powers of a court-
 ssion.
 (a) to issue summons or other orders requiring the atten-
 dance of any person before the Commission and the
 production of any document or record relevant to
 any investigation by the Commission;
 (b) to question any person in respect of any subject
 matter under investigation before the Commission;
 (c) to require any person to disclose any information
 within his or her knowledge relevant to any investi-
 gation by the Commission; and
 (d) to commit persons for contempt of its orders.
 (2) The Commission may, if satisfied that there has been
 an infringement of a human right or freedom, order-
 (a) the release of a detained or restricted person;
 (b) payment of compensation; or
 (c) any other legal remedy or redress.
 (3) A person or authority dissatisfied with an order made
 by the Commission under clause (2) of this article, has a right to
 appeal to the High Court.
 
 
 (4) The Commission shall not investigate-
 
 (a) any matter which is pending before a court or judicial
 tribunal; or
 (b) a matter involving the relations or dealings between
 the Government and the Government of any foreign
 State or international organisation; or
 (c) a matter relating to the exercise of the prerogative of
 mercy.
 54. Subject to this Constitution, the Commission shall be Independe-
 independent and shall not, in the performance of its duties, be nce of the
 Commi-
 subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.  ssion.
 55. (1) The Commission shall be self-accounting and all the Expenses of
 administrative expenses of the Commission including salary, Commi-
 allowances and pensions payable to persons serving with the
 Commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 (2) The Chairperson and other members of the
 Commission shall be paid such salaries and allowances as
 Parliament may prescribe.
 56. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the Removal of
 removal of a Judge of the High Court from office shall, with the Commi-
 ssioners.
 necessary modifications, apply to the removal from office of a
 member of the Commission.
 57. The appointment of the officers and other employees of Staff of
 the Commission shall be made by the Commission in consulta- Comi-
 ssion.
 tion with the Public Service Commission.
 58. Parliament may make laws to regulate and facilitate the Parliament
 performance of the functions of the Uganda Human Rights to make
 laws
 Commission.                                             regarding
 functions
 of Commi-
 ssion.
 
 
 CHAPTER FIVE
 
 REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
 Right to vote.
 Right to    59. (1) Every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or
 vote.    above, has a right to vote.
 (2) It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda of eighteen
 years of age or above, to register as a voter for public elections
 and referenda.
 (3) The State shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all
 citizens qualified to vote, register and exercise their right to vote.
 (4) Parliament shall make laws to provide for the facili-
 tation of citizens with disabilities to register and vote.
 Electoral Commission.
 Electoral    60. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall
 Commii-  consist of a Chairperson, a Deputy Chairperson and five other
 ssion.
 members appointed by the President with the approval of
 Parliament.
 (2) Members of the Commission shall be persons of high
 moral character, proven integrity and who possess considerable
 experience and demonstrated competence in the conduct of pub-
 lic affairs.
 (3) The members of the Commission shall hold office for
 seven years and their appointment may be renewed for one more
 term only.
 (4) If the appointment of a member of the Commission is
 being renewed, the renewal shall be done at least three months
 before the expiry of the first term.
 
 
 (5) A person holding any of the following offices shall
 relinguish his or her position in that office on appointment as a
 member of the Commission-
 (a) a member of Parliament; or
 (b) a member of a local government council; or
 (c) a member of the executive of a political party or
 political organisation; or
 (d) a public officer.
 (6) Members of the Commission shall be paid such
 emoluments as Parliament may determine.
 (7) If a member of the Commission is absent or dies, the
 President shall, with the approval of Parliament, appoint a person
 qualified in terms of this article to act in his or her place until that
 person is able again to resume his or her duties or as the case may
 be, until a new person is appointed to fill the vacancy.
 (8) A member of the Commission may be removed from
 office by the President only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising out of physical or mental incapacity;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 61. The Electoral Commission shall have the following func- Functions
 tions-                                                  of Electoral
 Commni-
 (a) to ensure that regular, free and fair elections are held; ssion.
 (b) to organise, conduct and supervise elections and refe-
 renda in accordance with this Constitution;
 (c) to demarcate constituencies in accordance with the
 provisions of this Constitution;
 
 
 (d) to ascertain, publish and declare in writing under its
 seal the results of the elections and referenda;
 (e) to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters'
 register;
 (f) to hear and determine election complaints arising
 before and during polling;
 (g) to formulate and implement civic educational pro-
 grammes relating to elections; and
 (h) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed
 by Parliament by law.
 Indepe-      62. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 ndence of  Commission shall be independent and shall, in the performance
 the Commi-
 ssion,    of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any
 person or authority.
 Consti-      63. (1) Subject to clauses (2) and (3) of this article, Uganda
 tuencies.  shall be divided into as many constituencies for the purpose of
 election of members of Parliament as Parliament may prescribe;
 and each constituency shall be represented by one member of
 Parliament.
 (2) When demarcating constituencies for the purposes of
 clause (1) of this article, the Electoral Commission shall ensure
 that each county, as approved by Parliament, has at least one
 member of Parliament; except that no constituency shall fall
 within more than one county.
 (3) Subject to clause (2) of this article, the boundary of a
 constituency shall be such that the number of inhabitants in the
 constituency is, as nearly as possible, equal to the population
 quota.
 (4) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article, the number
 of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or less than the pop-
 ulation quota in order to take account of means of communication,
 geographical features, density of population, area and boundaries
 of districts.
 
 
 (5) Subject to clause (1) of this article, the Commission
 shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within
 twelve months after the publication of results of a census of the
 population of Uganda and may as a result re-demarcate the
 constituencies.
 (6) Where the boundary of a constituency established
 under this article is altered as a result of a review, the alteration
 shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament.
 (7) For the purposes of this article, "population quota"
 means the number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants
 of Uganda by the number of constituencies into which Uganda is
 to be divided under this article.
 64. (1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Electoral Appeals
 Commission in respect of any of the complaints referred to in from deci-
 sions of
 paragraph (f) of article 61 of this Constitution, may appeal to the Cornmi-
 High Court.                                            ssion.
 (2) A person aggrieved by a decision of the
 Commission in respect of a demarcation of a boundary may
 appeal to a tribunal consisting of three persons appointed by
 the Chief Justice; and the Commission shall give effect to the
 decision of the tribunal.
 (3) A person aggrieved by a decision of the tribunal
 made under clause (2) of this article, may appeal to the High
 Court.
 (4) A decision of the High Court on an appeal under
 clause (1) or clause (3) of this article shall be final.
 (5) Parliament shall make laws providing for procedure
 for the expeditious disposal of appeals referred to in this article.
 65. The appointment of officers and employees of the staff of
 Electoral Commission shall be made by the Commission acting Comni-
 ssion.
 in consultation with the Public Service Commission.
 
 
 oxnses      66. (1) Parliament shall ensure that adequate resources and
 of Comm-
 ssion   facilities are provided to the Commission to enable it to perform
 its functions effectively.
 (2) The Commission shall be a self-accounting institution
 and shall deal directly with the Ministry responsible for finance
 on matters relating to its finances.
 (3) The administrative expenses of the Commission,
 including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in
 respect of persons serving with the Commission, shall be
 charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 Organisa-    67. (1) The Electoral Commission shall ensure that elections
 tion of   are held at times fixed and notified in advance to the public.
 elections.
 (2) No candidate in an election shall be denied reasonable
 access, and use of State-owned communication media.
 (3) All presidential candidates shall be given equal time
 and space on the State-owned media to present their programmes
 to the people.
 (4) Parliament shall make laws regulating the use of pub-
 lic resources and institutions during election campaigns.
 Voting at    68. (1) At a public election or referendum, voting shall, sub-
 elections  ject to the provisions of this Constitution, be by secret ballot
 and
 referenda.  using one ballot box at each polling station for all candidates in
 an election and for all sides in a referendum.
 (2) Immediately after the close of the poll, the presiding
 officer shall proceed to count at the polling station, the ballot
 papers of that station and record the votes cast in favour of each
 candidate or question.
 (3) A candidate is entitled to be present in person or
 through his or her representatives or polling agents at the polling
 station throughout the period of voting, counting of the votes and
 ascertaining of the results of the poll.
 
 
 (4) The presiding officer, the candidates or their repre-
 sentatives and in the case of a referendum, the sides contesting
 or their agents, if any, shall sign and retain a copy of a declara-
 tion stating-
 (a) the polling station;
 (b) the number of votes cast in favour of each candidate
 or question;
 and the presiding officer shall there and then, announce the
 results of the voting at that polling station before communicating
 them to the returning officer.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, an issue
 for determination by a referendum shall be taken to be determined
 by a majority of the votes cast at the referendum.
 Political Systems.
 69. (1) The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose Political
 and adopt a political system of their choice through free and systems.
 fair elections or referenda.
 (2) The political systems referred to in clause (1) of this
 article shall include-
 (a) the movement political system;
 (b) the multi-party political system; and
 (c) any other democratic and representative political system.
 70. (1) The movement political system is broad based, Movemnt
 inclusive and non-partisan and shall conform to the following  politic
 principles-                                               system.
 (a) participatory democracy;
 (b) democracy, accountability and transparency;
 (c) accessibility to all positions of leadership by all citizens;
 
 
 (d) individual merit as a basis for election to political
 offices.
 (2) Parliament may-
 (a) create organs under the movement political system
 and define their roles; and
 (b) prescribe from time to time, any other democratic
 principle of the movement political system, as it
 may consider necessary.
 Multi-party  71. A political party in the multi-party political system shall
 political  conform to the following principles-
 system.
 (a) every political party shall have a national character;
 (b) membership of a political party shall not be based on
 sex, ethnicity, religion, or other sectional division;
 (c) the internal organisation of a political party shall con-
 form to the democratic principles enshrined in this
 Constitution;
 (d) members of the national organs of a political party
 shall be regularly elected from citizens of Uganda
 in conformity with the provisions of paragraphs
 (a) and (b) of this article and with due considera-
 tion for gender;
 (e) political parties shall be required by law to account for
 the sources and use of their funds and assets;
 (f) no person shall be compelled to join a particular party
 by virtue of belonging to an organisation or interest
 group.
 Right to     72. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 form politi- right to form political parties and any other political organisa-
 cal organi-  i tofrmptsa                     oh
 sations.  tions is guaranteed.
 
 
 (2) An organisation shall not operate as a political party
 or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in
 this Constitution and it is registered.
 (3) Parliament shall by law regulate the financing and
 functioning of political organisations.
 73. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but Regutions
 notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (e) of clause (1) of of political
 organisa-
 article 29 and article 43 of this Constitution, during the period  tions.
 when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution
 has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political sys-
 tems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by
 law prescribe.
 (2) Regulations prescribed under this article shall not
 exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopt-
 ed to operate.
 74. (1) A referendum shall be held for the purpose of chang- Change of
 ing the political system--:                                  political
 systems by
 referenda or
 (a) if requested by a resolution supported by more than  elections.
 half of all members of Parliament; or
 (b) if requested by a resolution supported by the majority
 of the total membership of each of at least one half
 of all district councils; or
 (c) if requested through a petition to the Electoral
 Commission by at least one-tenth of the registered
 voters from each of at least two-thirds of the con-
 stituencies for which representatives are required to
 be directly elected under paragraph (a) of clause (1)
 of article 78 of this Constitution.
 (2) The political system may also be changed by the
 elected representatives of the people in Parliament and district
 councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than
 
 
 two thirds of all members of Parliament upon a petition to it sup-
 ported by not less than two thirds majority of the total membership
 of each of at least half of all district councils.
 (3) The resolutions or petitions for the purposes of chang-
 ing the political system shall be taken only in the fourth year of
 the term of any Parliament.
 Prohibition  75. Parliament shall have no power to enact a law establishing
 of one-party a one-party state.
 swfe.
 General.
 Parliament   76. Parliament may, subject to the provisions of this
 to enact  Constitution, enact such laws as may be necessary for the pur-
 laws on
 elections.  poses of this Chapter, including laws for the registration of
 voters, the conduct of public elections and referenda and,
 where necessary, making provision for voting by proxy.
 
 
 CHAPTER SIX
 
 THE LEGISLATURE
 Establishment, Composition and Functions of Parliament.
 77. (1) There shall be a Parliament of Uganda.          oafUament
 of Uganda.
 (2) The composition and functions of Parliament shall be
 as prescribed by this Constitution.
 (3) The term of Parliament shall be five years from the
 date of its first sitting after a general election.
 (4) Where there exists a state of war or a state of emer-
 gency which would prevent a normal general election from being
 held, Parliament may, by resolution supported by not less than
 two-thirds of all members of Parliament, extend the life of
 Parliament for a period not exceeding six months at a time.
 78. (1) Parliament shall consist of-                    Composition
 of
 (a) members directly elected to represent constituencies; Padiamen.
 (b) one woman representative for every district;
 (c) such numbers of representatives of the army, youth,
 workers, persons with disabilities and other
 groups as Parliament may determine; and
 (d) the Vice-President and Ministers, who, if not already
 elected members of Parliament, shall be ex-officio
 members of Parliament without the right to vote on
 any issue requiring a vote in Parliament.
 (2) Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the
 commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five
 years, Parliament shall review the representation under para-
 graphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this article for the purposes of
 retaining, increasing, or abolishing any such representation and
 any other matter incidental to it.
 
 
 (3) The representatives referred to in paragraph (a) of
 clause (1) of this article shall be elected on the basis of universal
 adult suffrage and by secret ballot.
 (4) Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the procedure for
 elections of representatives referred to in paragraphs (b) and (c)
 of clause (1) of this article.
 Functions   79. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 ofl      Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the
 peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.
 (2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or
 body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions
 having the force of law in Uganda except under authority
 conferred by an Act of Parliament.
 (3) Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote
 the democratic governance of Uganda.
 Q, , 1ifca-  80. (1) A person is qualified to be a member of Parliament if
 dio,"  a that person-
 dIs~4u',ifica-
 ti. of
 awlbes of     (a) is a citizen of Uganda;
 Parliament
 (b) is a registered voter; and
 (c) has completed a minimum formal education of
 Advanced Level standard or its equivalent.
 (2) A person is not qualified for election as a member
 of Parliament if that person-
 (a) is of unsound mind;
 (b) is holding or acting in an office the functions of which
 involve a responsibility for or in connection with the
 conduct of an election;
 (c) is a traditional or cultural leader as defined in clause
 (6) of article 246 of this Constitution;
 
 
 (d) has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt
 under any law in force in Uganda and has not been
 discharged; or
 (e) is under a sentence of death or a sentence of impris-
 onment exceeding nine months imposed by any
 competent court without the option of a fine.
 (3) A person elected to Parliament when he or she is
 a member of a local government council or holds a public
 office shall resign the office before assuming the office of
 member of Parliament.
 81. (1) A general election of members of Parliament shall be EIctionof
 held within thirty days before the expiration of the term of "b'" *
 Parliama
 Parliament.
 (2) Whenever a vacancy exists in Parliament, the Clerk to
 Parliament shall notify the Electoral Commission in writing with-
 in ten days after the vacancy has occurred; and a by-election
 shall be held within sixty days after the vacancy has occurred.
 (3) Notwithstanding clause (2) of this article, a by-election
 shall not be held within six months before the holding of a
 general election of Parliament.
 (4) Every person elected to Parliament shall take and
 subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of member of
 Parliament specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.
 (5) Except for the purpose of taking the oaths referred
 to in clause (4) of this article, no person shall sit or vote in
 Parliament before taking and subscribing the oaths.
 82. (1) There shall be a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Speaker and
 Parliament.                                             Speaker of
 Padianlem
 (2) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall be elected by
 members of Parliament from among their number.
 
 
 (3) A person shall not be qualified to be elected a Speaker
 or Deputy Speaker if he or she is a Vice-President or a Minister.
 (4) Subject to clause (4) of article 81 of this Constitution,
 no business shall be transacted in Parliament other than an elec-
 tion to the office of Speaker at any time that office is vacant.
 (5) The Chief Justice or a Judge designated by the Chief
 Justice shall preside at an election of a Speaker and the Speaker
 shall preside at an election of the Deputy Speaker.
 (6) An election to the office of Deputy Speaker shall be
 held at the first sitting of Parliament after that office becomes
 vacant.
 (7) The Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall vacate his or her
 office-
 (a) if he or she is appointed to any public office;
 (b) if he or she becomes a Minister;
 (c) if he or she resigns his or her office by writing signed
 by him or her addressed to the Clerk to Parliament;
 (d) if he or she ceases to be a member of Parliament; or
 (e) if he or she is removed by resolution of Parliament
 supported by not less than two-thirds of all mem-
 bers of Parliament.
 (8) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall receive such
 salaries, allowances and gratuities as may be prescribed by
 Parliament.
 (9) The salaries, allowances and gratuities of the Speaker
 and Deputy Speaker shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 
 
 (10) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall each, before
 assuming the duties of office take and subscribe the oath of
 Speaker or Deputy Speaker specified in the Fourth Schedule to
 this Constitution.
 83. (1) A member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Tenure of
 office of
 Parliament-                                             members of
 Parliament.
 (a) if he or she resigns his or her office in writing signed
 by him or her and addressed to the Speaker;
 (b) if such circumstances arise that if that person were not
 a member of Parliament would cause that person to
 be disqualified for election as a member of Parliament
 under article 80 of this Constitution;
 (c) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, upon
 dissolution of Parliament;
 (d) if that person is absent from fifteen sittings of
 Parliament without permission in writing of the
 Speaker during any period when Parliament is con-
 tinuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory
 explanation to the relevant Parliamentary Committee
 for his or her absence;
 (e) if that person is found guilty by the appropriate
 tribunal of violation of the Leadership Code of
 Conduct and the punishment imposed is or includes
 the vacation of the office of a member of
 Parliament;
 (f) if recalled by the electorate in his or her constituency
 in accordance with this Constitution;
 (g) if that person leaves the political party for which he or
 she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament
 to join another party or to remain in Parliament as
 an independent member;
 
 
 (h) if, having been elected to Parliament as an indepen-
 dent candidate, that person joins a political party;
 (i) if that person. is appointed a public officer.
 (2) Notwithstanding paragraphs (g) and (h) of clause (1)
 of this article, membership of a coalition government of which
 his or her original political party forms part, shall not affect the
 status of any member of Parliament.
 (3) The provisions of paragraphs (g) and (h) of clause (1)
 and of clause (2) of this article shall only apply during any period
 when the multi-party system of government is in operation.
 Right of     84. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the electorate
 cafl.     of any constituency and of any interest group referred to in article
 78 of this Constitution have the right to recall their member of
 Parliament before the expiry of the term of Parliament.
 (2) A member of Parliament may be recalled from that
 office on any of the following grounds-
 (a) physical or mental incapacity rendering that member
 incapable of performing the functions of the office; or
 (b) misconduct or misbehaviour likely to bring hatred,
 ridicule, contempt or disrepute to the office; or
 (c) persistent deserting of the electorate without reason-
 able cause.
 (3) The recall of a member of Parliament shall be initiated
 by a petition in writing setting out the grounds relied on and
 signed by at least two-thirds of the registered voters of the con-
 stituency or of the interest group referred to in clause (1) of this
 article, and shall be delivered to the Speaker.
 (4) On receipt of the petition referred to in clause (3) of
 this article, the Speaker shall, within seven days require the
 Electoral Commission to conduct a public inquiry into the matters
 alleged in the petition and the Electoral Commission shall
 expeditiously conduct the necessary inquiry and report its
 findings to the Speaker.
 
 
 (5) The Speaker shall-
 
 (a) declare the seat vacant, if the Electoral Commission
 reports that it is satisfied from the inquiry, with the
 genuineness of the petition; or
 (b) declare immediately that the petition was unjustified, if
 the Commission reports that it is not satisfied with
 the genuineness of the petition.
 (6) Subject to the provisions of clauses (2), (3), (4) and
 (5) of this article, Parliament shall, by law prescribe the pro-
 cedure to be followed for the recall of a member of Parliament.
 85. (1) A member of Parliament shall be paid such emoluments Emoluments
 of members
 and such gratuity and shall be provided with such facilities as may  of
 be determined by Parliament.                                Parliament.
 (2) A member of Parliament shall not hold any office of
 profit or emolument likely to compromise his or her office.
 86. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and  Deter-
 mination of
 determine any question whether-                             questions of
 member-
 (a) a person has been validly elected a member of 'hip.
 Parliament or the seat of a member of Parliament
 has become vacant; or
 (b) a person has been validly elected as Speaker or
 Deputy Speaker or having been so elected, has
 vacated that office.
 (2) A person aggrieved by the determination of the High
 Court under this article may appeal to the Court of Appeal.
 (3) Parliament shall, by law make provision with respect to-
 (a) the persons eligible to apply to the High Court for deter-
 mination of any question under this article; and
 
 
 (b) the circumstances and manner in which and the
 conditions upon which any such application may
 be made.
 Clerk to    87. There shall be a public officer designated Clerk to
 Parliament  Parliament appointed by the President in consultation with the
 and other
 staff.   Public Service Commission and such other members of staff as
 may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the functions of
 Parliament.
 Procedure of Parliament.
 Quorum of   88. The quorum of Parliament shall be one-third of all mem-
 Parliament. bers of Parliament.
 Voting in   89. (1) Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or
 Parliament. any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed
 for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of
 votes of the members present and voting.
 (2) The person presiding in Parliament shall have neither
 an original nor a casting vote and if on any question before
 Parliament the votes are equally divided, the motion shall be lost.
 Committees  90. (1) Parliament shall appoint standing committees and
 Of
 Parliament. other committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its
 functions.
 (2) The following shall apply with respect to the compo-
 sition of the committees of Parliament-
 (a) the members of standing committees shall be elected
 from among members of Parliament during the first
 session of Parliament;
 (b) the rules of procedure of Parliament shall prescribe
 the manner in which the members and chairpersons
 of the committees are to be elected.
 
 
 (3) The functions of standing committees shall include
 the following-
 (a) to discuss and make recommendations on all bills laid
 before Parliament;
 (b) to initiate any bill within their respective areas of
 competence;
 (c) to assess and evaluate activities of Government and
 other bodies;
 (d) to carry out relevant research in their respective fields;
 and
 (e) to report to Parliament on their functions.
 (4) In the exercise of their functions under this article,
 committees of Parliament-
 (a) may call any Minister or any person holding public
 office and private individuals to submit memoranda
 or appear before them to give evidence;
 (b) may co-opt any member of Parliament or employ
 qualified persons to assist them in the discharge of
 their functions;
 (c) shall have the powers of the High Court for-
 (i) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and exam-
 ining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise;
 (ii) compelling the production of documents; and
 (iii) issuing a commission or request to examine wit-
 nesses abroad.
 91. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Eucs of
 power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through IeWli,,
 bills passed by Parliament and assented to by the President.  powe.
 57
 
 
 (2) A bill passed by Parliament shall, as soon as possible,
 be presented to the President for assent.
 (3) The President shall, within thirty days after a bill is
 presented to him or her-
 (a) assent to the bill; or
 (b) return the bill to Parliament with a request that the bill
 or a particular provision of it be reconsidered by
 Parliament; or
 (c) notify the Speaker in writing that he or she refuses to
 assent to the bill.
 (4) Where a bill has been returned to Parliament under
 paragraph (b) of clause (3) of this article, Parliament shall reconsider
 it and if passed again, it shall be presented for a second time to the
 President for assent.
 (5) Where the President returns the same bill twice under
 paragraph (b) of clause (3) of this article and the bill is passed for
 the third time, with the support of at least two-thirds of all members
 of Parliament, the Speaker shall cause a copy of the bill to be laid
 before Parliament and the bill shall become law without the
 assent of the President.
 (6) Where the President-
 (a) refuses to assent to a bill under paragraph (c) of clause
 (3) of this article, Parliament may reconsider the
 bill and if passed, the bill shall be presented to the
 President for assent;
 (b) refuses to assent to a bill which has been reconsidered
 and passed under paragraph (a) of this clause or
 under clause (4) of this article, the Speaker shall,
 upon the refusal, if the bill was so passed with the
 support of at least two-thirds of all members of
 Parliament, cause a copy of the bill to be laid before
 Parliament and the bill shall become law without
 the assent of the President.
 
 
 (7) Where the President fails to do any of the acts specified
 in clause (3) of this article within the period prescribed in that
 clause, the President shall be taken to have assented to the bill
 and at the expiration of that period, the Speaker shall cause a
 copy of the bill to be laid before Parliament. and the bill shall
 become law without the assent of the President.
 (8) A bill passed by Parliament and assented to by the
 President or which has otherwise become law under this article
 shall be an Act of Parliament and shall be published in the
 Gazette.
 92. Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or Restriction
 judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or on retro-
 spective
 judgement.                                              legislation.
 93. Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is intro- Restriction
 duced on behalf of the Government-                      on financial
 matters.
 (a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that
 makes provision for any of the following-.
 (i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of tax-
 ation otherwise than by reduction; or
 (ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated
 Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the
 alteration of any such charge otherwise than
 by reduction; or
 (iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from the
 Consolidated Fund or other public fund of
 Uganda of any moneys not charged on that
 fund or any increase in the amount of that pay-
 ment, issue or withdrawal; or
 (iv) the composition or remission of any debt due to
 the Government of Uganda; or
 
 
 (b) proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to
 a motion, the effect of which would be to make
 provision for any of the purposes specified in
 paragraph (a) of this article.
 Rules of    94. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 procedure in Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure includ-
 Parliament.
 ing the procedure of its committees.
 (2) Parliament may act notwithstanding a vacancy in its
 membership.
 (3) The presence or the participation of a person not enti-
 tled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of
 Parliament shall not by itself, invalidate those proceedings.
 (4) The rules of procedure of Parliament shall include the
 following provisions-
 (a) the Speaker shall determine the order of business in
 Parliament and shall give priority to Government
 business;
 (b) a member of Parliament has the right to move a
 private member's bill;
 (c) the member moving the private member's bill shall be
 afforded reasonable assistance by the department of
 Government whose area of operation is affected by
 the bill; and
 (d) the office of the Attorney-General shall afford the
 member moving the private member's bill profes-
 sional assistance in the drafting of the bill.
 sessions of  95. (1) Where a new Parliament is elected, the President
 Pwaiam=t. shall, by proclamation, appoint the place and a date not beyond
 seven days after the expiry of the term of Parliament or of the
 extended period, as the case may be, for the first sitting of the
 new Parliament.
 
 
 (2) A session of Parliament shall be held at such place
 within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker
 may, by proclamation, appoint.
 (3) The Speaker may, after consultation with the
 President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation.
 (4) A session of Parliament shall be held at least once a
 year but the period between one session and the next following
 session shall be less than twelve months.
 (5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, at
 least one-third of all members of Parliament may, in writing
 signed by them, request a meeting of Parliament; and the
 Speaker shall summon Parliament to meet within twenty-one
 days after receipt of the request.
 96. Parliament shall stand dissolved upon the expiration of its Dissolution
 term as prescribed by article 77 of this Constitution.  of
 Parliament.
 General.
 97. The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, members of Parliament Parlia-
 and any other person participating or assisting in or acting in  mentar
 immunities
 connection with or reporting the proceedings of Parliament or and
 any of its committees shall be entitled to such immunities and privileges.
 privileges as Parliament shall by law prescribe.
 
 
 CHAPTER SEVEN
 
 THE EXECUTIVE
 The President.
 President of  98. (1) There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the
 Uganda.  Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of
 the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces and the Fountain of
 Honour.
 (2) The President shall take precedence over all persons
 in Uganda, and in descending order, the Vice-President, the
 Speaker and the Chief Justice, shall take precedence over all
 other persons in Uganda.
 (3) Before assuming the duties of the office of President,
 a person elected President shall take and subscribe the oath of
 allegiance and the presidential oath specified in the Fourth
 Schedule to this Constitution.
 (4) While holding office, the President shall not be liable to
 proceedings in any court.
 (5) Civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted
 against a person after ceasing to be President, in respect of any-
 thing done or omitted to be done in his or her personal capacity
 before or during the term of office of that person; and any period
 of limitation in respect of any such proceedings shall not be
 taken to run during the period while that person was President.
 Executive   99. (1) The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the
 authorty of President and shall be exercised in accordance with this
 Uada.  Constitution and the laws of Uganda.
 (2) The President shall execute and maintain this
 Constitution and all laws made under or continued in force by
 this Constitution.
 
 
 (3) It shall be the duty of the President to abide by,
 uphold and safeguard this Constitution and the laws of Uganda
 and to promote the welfare of the citizens and protect the terri-
 torial integrity of Uganda.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 functions conferred on the President by clause (1) of this article
 may be exercised by the President either directly or through offi-
 cers subordinate to the President.
 (5) A statutory instrument or other instrument issued by the
 President or any person authorised by the President may be authen-
 ticated by the signature of a Minister; and the validity of any
 instrument so authenticated shall not be called in question on the
 ground that it is not made, issued or executed by the President.
 100. The President shall, whenever leaving Uganda, notify in  Notification
 writing the Vice-President, the Speaker and the Chief Justice.  of absence
 of President
 from
 Uganda.
 101. (1) The President shall, at the beginning of each session  Presidential
 of Parliament, deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the  addrsses.
 nation.
 (2) The President may, also, in consultation with the
 Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of
 national importance.
 102. A person is not qualified for election as President unless Qualifica-
 tions of
 that person is-                                             President.
 (a) a citizen of Uganda by birth;
 (b) not less than thirty-five years and not more than
 seventy-five years of age; and
 (c) a person qualified to be a member of Parliament.
 103. (1) The election of the President shall be by universal Election of
 adult suffrage through a secret ballot.                     President.
 
 
 (2) A person shall not be a candidate in a presidential
 election unless-
 (a) that person submits to the Electoral Commission on or
 before the day appointed as nomination day in rela-
 tion to the election, a document which is signed by
 that person nominating him or her as a candidate; and
 (b) the nomination is supported by one hundred voters in
 each of at least two-thirds of all the districts in Uganda.
 (3) The election of the President shall be held during the
 first thirty days of the last ninety days before the expiration of the
 term of the President, except in the case of-
 (a) the first election under this Constitution;
 (b) an election held under clause (6) of article 104 of this
 Constitution;
 (c) an election held under clause (2) of article 109 of this
 Constitution; and
 (d) an election necessitated by the fact that a normal
 presidential election could not be held as a result of
 the existence of a state of war or a state of emergency,
 in which case, the election shall be held within such
 period as Parliament may, by law, prescribe.
 (4) A candidate shall not be declared elected as President
 unless the number of votes cast in favour of that candidate at
 the presidential election is more than fifty percent of valid
 votes cast at the election.
 (5) Where at a presidential election no candidate obtains
 the percentage of votes specified in clause (4) of this article, a
 second election shall be held within thirty days after the declaration
 of the results in which election the two candidates who obtained the
 highest number of votes shall be the only candidates.
 
 
 (6) The candidate who obtains the highest number of
 votes in an election under clause (5) of this article shall be
 declared elected President.
 (7) The Electoral Commission shall ascertain, publish
 and declare in writing under its seal, the results of the presidential
 election within forty-eight hours from the close of polling.
 (8) A person elected President during the term of a
 President shall assume office within twenty-four hours after the
 expiration of the term of the predecessor and in any other case,
 within twenty four hours after being declared elected as
 President.
 (9) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 Parliament shall by law, prescribe the procedure for the election
 and assumption of office by a President.
 104. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, any aggrieved  chakagin
 candidate may petition the Supreme Court for an order that a PreidwA.
 candidate declared by the Electoral Commission elected as
 President was not validly elected.
 (2) A petition under clause (1) of this article shall be
 lodged in the Supreme Court registry within ten days after the
 declaration of the election results.
 (3) The Supreme Court shall inquire into and determine the
 petition expeditiously and shall declare its findings not later than
 thirty days from the date the petition is filed.
 (4) Where no petition is filed within the time prescribed
 under clause (2) of this article, or where a petition having been
 filed, is dismissed by the Supreme Court, the candidate declared
 elected shall conclusively be taken to have been duly elected as
 President.
 (5) After due inquiry under clause (3) of this article, the
 Supreme Court may-
 
 
 (a) dismiss the petition; or
 
 (b) declare which candidate was validly elected; or
 (c) annul the election.
 (6) Where an election is annulled, a fresh election shall
 be held within twenty days from the date of the annulment.
 (7) If after a fresh election held under clause (6) of this article
 there is another petition which succeeds, then the presidential
 election shall be postponed; and upon the expiry of the term of the
 incumbent President, the Speaker shall perform the functions of the
 office of President until a new President is elected and assumes
 office.
 (8) For the purposes of this article, clause (4) of article 98
 of this Constitution shall not apply.
 (9) Parliament shall make such laws as may be necessary
 for the purposes of this article including laws for grounds of
 annulment and rules of procedure.
 Tenure of   105. (1) A person elected President under this Constitution
 office of
 President.  shall, subject to clause (3) of this article, hold office for a term
 of five years.
 (2) A person shall not be elected under this Constitution
 to hold office as President for more than two terms as prescribed
 by this article.
 (3) The office of President shall become vacant-
 (a) on the expiration of the period specified in this article; or
 (b) if the incumbent dies or resigns or ceases to hold
 office under article 107 of this Constitution.
 (4) The President may, by writing signed by him or her,
 and addressed to the Chief Justice, resign from office as
 President.
 
 
 (3) The resignation of the President shall take effect
 when it is received by the Chief Justice.
 (6) The Chief Justice shall, immediately upon receiving
 the resignation of the President under this article, notify the Vice-
 President, the Speaker and the Electoral Commission of the
 resignation.
 106. (1) The President shall be paid a salary and allowances Tems and
 and afforded such other benefits as Parliament shall by law provide. condio
 of servce of
 President.
 (2) Parliament shall, by law, make provision for the grant
 of benefits for a President who ceases to hold office otherwise
 than by being removed under paragraph (a) or (b) of clause (1)
 of article 107 of this Constitution.
 (3) The salary, allowances and other benefits granted to a
 President under this article shall be charged on the Consolidated
 Fund.
 (4) The President is exempted from direct personal taxation
 on allowances and other benefits except on the official salary.
 (5) The President shall not hold any other public office
 other than those conferred by this Constitution or any office of
 profit or emolument likely to compromise the office of President.
 (6) The salary, allowances and other benefits granted to
 the President under this article shall not be varied to the disad-
 vantage of the President while he or she holds office.
 (7) The retirement benefits granted to a President under
 this article shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the
 President.
 107. (1) The President may be removed from office in accor- fmov  of
 dance with this article on any of the following grounds-   Pride.
 
 
 (a) abuse of office or wilful violation of the oath of alle-
 giance and the presidential oath or any provision of
 this Constitution;
 (b) misconduct or misbehaviour-
 (i) that he or she has conducted himself or herself in a
 manner which brings or is likely to bring the
 office of President into hatred, ridicule, contempt
 or disrepute; or
 (ii) that he or she has dishonestly done any act or
 omission which is prejudicial or inimical to the
 economy or security of Uganda; or
 (c) physical or mental incapacity, namely that he or she is
 incapable of performing the functions of his or her
 office by reason of physical or mental incapacity.
 (2) For the purpose of removal of the President under
 paragraph (a) or (b) of clause (1) of this article, a notice in writing
 signed by not less than one-third of all the members of
 Parliament shall be submitted to the Speaker-
 (a) stating that they intend to move a motion for a resolution
 in Parliament for the removal of the President on the
 charge that the President has-
 (i) wilfully abused his or her office or wilfully violated
 the oath of allegiance and the Presidential oath or
 any other provision of this Constitution in terms
 of paragraph (a) of clause (1) of this article;
 (ii) misconducted himself or herself or misbehaved
 in terms of paragraph (b) of clause (1) of this
 article; and
 (b) setting out the particulars of the charge supported by
 the necessary documents on which it is claimed
 that the conduct of the President be investigated
 for the purposes of his or her removal.
 
 
 (3) The Speaker shall, within twenty-four hours after
 receipt of the notice referred to in clause (2) of this article, cause
 a copy to be transmitted to the President and the Chief Justice.
 (4) The Chief Justice shall, within seven days after
 receipt of the notice transmitted under clause (3) of this article,
 constitute a tribunal comprising three Justices of the Supreme
 Court to investigate the allegation in the notice and to report its
 findings to Parliament stating whether or not there is a prima
 facie case for the removal of the President.
 (5) The President is entitled to appear at the proceedings
 of the tribunal and to be represented there by a lawyer or other
 expert or person of his or her choice.
 (6) If the tribunal determines that there is a prima facie
 case for the removal of the President under paragraph (a) or (b)
 of clause (1) of this article, then if Parliament passes the resolu-
 tion supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all
 members of Parliament, the President shall cease to hold office.
 (7) For the purposes of the removal of the President on
 grounds of physical or mental incapacity under paragraph (c) of
 clause (1) of this article, there shall be submitted to the Speaker
 a notice in writing signed by not less than one-third of all the
 members of Parliament-
 (a) stating that they intend to move a motion for a resolution
 in Parliament for the removal of the President from
 office on grounds of physical or mental incapacity; and
 (b) giving particulars of the alleged incapacity.
 (8) The Speaker shall, within twenty-four hours after
 receipt of a notice under clause (7) of this article, cause a copy
 to be transmitted to the President and the Chief Justice.
 (9) The Chief Justice shall, within seven days after
 receipt of the notice transmitted under clause (8) of this article
 and in consultation with the professional head of the medical ser-
 vices in Uganda, constitute a Medical Board comprising five
 
 
 qualified and eminent medical specialists to examine the
 President in respect of the alleged incapacity and to report its
 findings to Parliament.
 (10) The Chief Justice shall, within twenty-four hours
 after constituting the Medical Board, inform the President
 accordingly, and the President shall submit himself or herself to
 the Medical Board for examination within seven days.
 (11) If the Medical Board determines that the President is
 by reason of physical or mental incapacity unable to perform the
 functions of the office of President, and Parliament passes the
 resolution for the removal of the President supported by the
 votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of
 Parliament, the President shall cease to hold office.
 (12) If the Medical Board, after the expiration of the period
 of seven days referred to in clause (10) of this article, reports that
 the President has failed or refused to submit to the Medical
 Board in accordance with that clause, and Parliament passes the
 resolution for the removal of the President supported by the
 votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of
 Parliament, the President shall cease to hold office.
 (13) The motion for a resolution for the removal of the
 President shall be moved in Parliament within fourteen days after
 the receipt by the Speaker of the report of the tribunal or the
 Medical Board.
 (14) The President is entitled to appear in person and be
 heard and to be assisted or represented by a lawyer or other
 expert or person of his or her choice during the proceedings of
 Parliament relating to the motion for a resolution under this article.
 vice-      108. (1) There shall be a Vice-President of Uganda.
 (2) The President shall, with the approval of Parliament
 by a simple majority, appoint a Vice-President.
 
 
 (3) The Vice-President shall-
 
 (a) deputise for the President as and when the need
 arises; and
 (b) perform such other functions as may be assigned to
 him or her by the President, or as may be, conferred
 on him or her by this Constitution.
 (4) The qualifications prescribed for the office of
 President by article 102 of this Constitution shall apply to the
 office of Vice-President.
 (5) The office of Vice-President shall become vacant if-
 (a) the appointment is revoked by the President; or
 (b) the incumbent resigns or dies.
 (6) With the exception of clause (2) of that article, article
 106 of this Constitution shall, subject to this Constitution, apply
 to the Vice-President.
 (7) Where the office of Vice-President becomes vacant,
 the President shall, with the approval of Parliament, and as soon
 as possible but in any case not later than fourteen days, appoint
 a person qualified to hold the office of Vice-President.
 (8) The Vice-President shall, before commencing to per-
 form the functions of Vice-President, take and subscribe the oath
 of allegiance and the oath of Vice-President, specified in the
 Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.
 109. (1) If the President dies, resigns, or is removed from  Abwnm of
 office under this Constitution, the Vice-President shall assume  Presidt.
 the office of President until fresh elections are held and the
 elected President assumes office in accordance with clause
 (8) of article 103 of this Constitution.
 
 
 (2) Elections for the President under this article shall be
 held within six months after the death, resignation or removal of
 the President.
 (3) No elections shall be held under this article if the
 residual term of the President is one year or less.
 (4) Whenever the President is for any reason unable to
 perform the functions of the office of President, the Vice-
 President shall perform those functions until the President is able
 again to perform those functions.
 (5) Where the President and the Vice-President are both
 unable to perform the functions of the office of the President, the
 Speaker shall perform those functions until the President or the
 Vice-President is able to perform those functions or until a new
 President assumes office.
 (6) The Vice-President shall, before assuming the duties
 of the office of President under clause (1) of this article, appoint
 a person to the office of Vice-President, subject to the approval
 of Parliament.
 (7) A person appointed under clause (6) of this article,
 shall, before assuming the duties of the office of Vice-President
 take and subscribe the oaths in respect of that office under clause
 (7) of article 108 of this Constitution.
 (8) Before assuming the duties of the office of President
 under clause (5) of this article, the Speaker shall take and sub-
 scribe the oaths specified in relation to that office in the Fourth
 Schedule to this Constitution.
 (9) Whenever the Speaker assumes the office of President
 as a result of the death, resignation or removal of the President
 and the Vice-President, or under the provisions of clause (7) of
 article 104 of this Constitution, a presidential election shall be
 held in accordance with clause (2) of this article.
 72
 
 
 110. (1) The President may, in c,-nsultation with the Cabinet, by  State of
 yenr~gcny.
 proclamation, declare that a s:ate of emergency exists in
 Uganda, or any part of Uganda if the President is satisfied that
 circumstances exist in Uganda or in that part of Uganda-
 (a) in which Uganda or that part of it is threatened by war
 or external aggression; or
 (b) in which the security or the economic life of the country
 or that part, is threatened by internal insurgency or
 natural disaster; or
 (c) which render necessary the taking of measures which
 are required for securing the public safety, the
 defence of Uganda and the maintenance of public
 order and supplies and services essential to the life
 of the community.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this article, a state of
 emergency declared under clause (1) of this article shall remain
 in existence for not more than ninety days and shall then expire.
 (3) The President shall cause the proclamation declaring
 the state of emergency to be laid before Parliament for approval
 as soon as practicable and in any case not later than fourteen days
 after it was issued.
 (4) A state of emergency may be extended by Parliament for
 a period not exceeding ninety days at a time.
 (5) The President or Parliament shall, if satisfied that the
 circumstances for the declaration of the state of emergency have
 ceased to exist, revoke the proclamation by which the state of
 emergency was declared.
 (6) During any period when a state of emergency
 declared under this article exists, the President shall submit to
 Parliament at such intervals as Parliament may prescribe,
 regular reports on actions taken by or on behalf of the
 President for the purposes of the emergency.
 
 
 (7) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 Parliament shall enact such laws as may be necessary for
 enabling effective measures to be taken for dealing with any state
 of emergency that may be declared under this article.
 (8) Any resolution passed by Parliament for the purposes
 of clause (4) or (5) of this article shall be supported by the votes
 of more than one-half of all the members of Parliament.
 The Cabinet.
 The        111. (1) There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the
 Cabinet.  President, the Vice-President and such number of Ministers as
 may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the
 efficient running of the State.
 (2) The functions of the Cabinet shall be to determine,
 formulate and implement the policy of the Government and to
 perform such other functions as may be conferred by this
 Constitution or any other law.
 (3) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet who shall be
 appointed by the President in consultation with the Public
 Service Commission.
 (4) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall have charge of the
 Cabinet Office and shall be responsible in accordance with such
 instructions as may be given to him or her by the President, for
 arranging the business for and keeping the minutes of the
 Cabinet and for conveying the decisions of the Cabinet to the
 appropriate person or authority and shall perform such other
 functions as the President may direct.
 (5) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall, before assuming
 the duties of his or her office, take and subscribe the oath of alle-
 giance and the oath of Secretary to the Cabinet specified in the
 Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.
 
 
 112. (1) Cabinet meetings shall be summoned and presided Meetings of
 over by the President and in his or her absence, by the Vice-President Cabia
 or in the absence of both of them, by a Minister designated in writing
 by the President
 (2) The Cabinet shall regulate the procedure of its meetings.
 113. (1) Cabinet Ministers shall be appointed by the President Cabit
 with the approval of Parliament from among members of  "
 Parliament or persons qualified to be elected members of
 Parliament.
 (2) The total number of Cabinet Ministers shall not
 exceed twenty-one except with the approval of Parliament.
 (3) A Cabinet Minister shall have responsibility for such
 functions of Government as the President may, from time to
 time, assign to him or her.
 (4) A Minister shall not hold any office of profit or
 emolument likely to compromise his or her office.
 114. (1) The President may, with the approval of Parliament, Other
 appoint other Ministers to assist Cabinet Ministers in the perfor- Ministers.
 mance of their functions.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this article, clause (1) of
 article 113 of this Constitution shall apply to the appointment of
 Ministers under clause (1) of this article.
 (3) The total number of Ministers appointed under this
 article shall not exceed twenty-one except with the approval of
 Parliament.
 (4) A Minister referred to in this article shall have
 responsibility for such functions of the Ministry to which he or
 she is appointed, as the President may, from time to time, assign
 to him or her; and in the absence of the Cabinet Minister in his
 or her Ministry, shall perform the functions of the Cabinet
 Minister as the Prsident directs.
 75
 
 
 (5) Clause (4) of article 113 of this Constitution applies
 to a Minister referred to in clause (1) of this article.
 Oath of     115. A Minister shall, before assuming the duties of office take
 Minister.  and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of Minister
 specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.
 Vacation of  116. The office of a Minister shall become vacant-
 office of
 Minister.
 (a) if the appointment of the holder of the office is
 revoked by the President; or
 (b) if the holder-
 (i) resigns;
 (ii) becomes disqualified to be a member of
 Parliament; or
 (iii) dies.
 Respon-     117. Ministers shall, individually be accountable to the
 sibility of
 Ministers.  President for the administration of their Ministries and collec-
 tively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet.
 Vote of     118. (1) Parliament may, by resolution supported by more than
 censure.
 half of all members of Parliament, pass a vote of censure against
 a Minister on any of the following grounds-
 (a) abuse of office or wilful violation of the oath of
 allegiance or oath of office;
 (b) misconduct or misbehaviour;
 (c) physical or mental incapacity, namely, that he or she is
 incapable of performing the functions of his or her
 office by reason of physical or mental incapacity;
 (d) mismanagement; or
 (e) incompetence.
 
 
 (2) Upon a vote of censure being passed against a
 Minister, the President shall, unless the Mirnster resigns his or
 her office, take appropriate action in the matter.
 (3) Proceedings for censure of a Minister shall be initiated
 by a petitiop to the President through the Speaker signed by not
 less than one-third of all members of Parliament giving notice
 that they are dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the
 Minister and intend to move a motion for a resolution of censure
 and setting out particulars of the grounds in support of the
 motion.
 (4) The President shall, upon receipt of the petition, cause
 a copy of it to be given to the Minister in question.
 (5) The motion for the resolution of censure shall not be
 debated until the expiry of thirty days after the petition was sent
 to the President.
 (6) A Minister in respect of whom a vote of censure is
 debated under clause (5) of this article is entitled during the
 debate to be heard in his or her defence.
 119. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General who shall be a Atnony-
 Cabinet Minister appointed by the President with the approval of c,,m-*
 Parliament.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed
 Attorney-General unless he or she is qualified to practise as an
 advocate of the High Court and has so practised or gained the
 necessary experience for not less than ten years.
 (3) The Attorney-General shall be the principal legal
 adviser of the Government.
 (4) The functions of the Attorney-General shall include
 the following-
 (a) to give legal advice and legal services to the
 Government on any subject;
 
 
 (b) to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties,
 conventions and documents by whatever name
 called, to which the Government is a party or in
 respect of which the Government has an interest;
 (c) to represent the Government in courts or any other
 legal proceedings to which the government is a
 party; and
 (d) to perform such other functions as may be assigned to
 him or her by the President or by law.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no
 agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever
 name called, to which the government is a party or in respect of
 which the government has an interest, shall be concluded without
 legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and
 subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.
 (6) Until Parliament makes the law referred to in clause
 (5) of this article, the Attorney-General may, by statutory instru-
 ment, exempt any particular category of agreement or contract
 none of the parties to which is a foreign government or its
 agency or an international organisation from the application of
 that clause.
 Director of Public Prosecutions.
 Diretor of  120. (1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions
 Public
 wOSecu-  appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Public
 dow.     Service Commission and with the approval of Parliament.
 (2) A person is not qualified to be appointed Director of
 Public Prosecutions unless he or she is qualified to be appointed
 a Judge of the High Court.
 (3) The functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions
 are the following-
 
 
 (a) to direct the police to investigate any information of a
 criminal nature and to report to him or her expedi-
 tiously;
 (b) to institute criminal proceedings against any person or
 authority in any court with competent jurisdiction
 other than a court martial;
 (c) to take over and continue any criminal proceedings
 instituted by any other person or authority;
 (d) to discontinue at any stage before judgement is delivered,
 any criminal proceedings to which this article relates,
 instituted by himself or herself or any other person or
 authority; except that the Director of Public
 Prosecutions shall not discontinue any proceedings
 commenced by another person or authority except
 with the consent of the court.
 (4) The functions conferred on the Director of Public
 Prosecutions under clause (3) of this article-
 (a) may, in the case of the functions under paragraphs (a),
 (b) and (c) of clause (3) of this article, be exercised
 by him or her in person or by officers authorised by
 him or her in accordance with general or specified
 instructions; and
 (b) shall, in the case of the functions under paragraph (d) of
 that clause, be exercised by him or her exclusively.
 (5) In exercising his or her powers under this article, the
 Director of Public Prosecutions shall have regard to the public
 interest, the interest of the adrnnistration of justice and the need
 to prevent abuse of legal process.
 (6) In the exercise of the functions conferred on him or her
 by this article, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be
 subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.
 
 
 (7) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have the
 same terms and conditions of service as those of a High Court
 Judge.
 Prerogative of Mercy.
 Pmrogafive  121. (1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the
 of mercy.  Prerogative of Mercy which shall consist of-
 (a) the Attorney-General who shall be Chairperson; and
 (b) six prominent citizens of Uganda appointed by the
 President.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a
 member of the Committee if he or she is a member of
 Parliament, the Uganda Law Society or a District Council.
 (3) A member appointed under paragraph (b) of clause
 (I ) of this article shall serve for a period of four years and shall
 cease to be a member of the Committee-
 (a) if circumstances arise that would disqualify him or her
 from appointment; or
 (b) if removed by the President for inability to perform
 the functions of his or her office arising from
 infirmity of body or mind or for misbehaviour,
 misconduct or incompetence.
 (4) The President may, on the advice of the Committee-
 (a) grant to any person convicted of an offence, a pardon
 either free or subject to lawful conditions;
 (b) grant to a person a respite, either indefinite or for a
 specified period, from the execution of punishment
 imposed on him or her for an offence;
 
 
 (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for a
 punishment imposed on a person for an offence; or
 (d) remit the whole or part of a punishment imposed on a
 person or of a penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to
 Government on account of any offence.
 (5) Where a person is sentenced to death for an offence,
 a written report of the case from the trial judge or judges or person
 presiding over the court or tribunal, together with such other
 information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as
 may be necessary, shall be submitted to the Advisory Committee
 on the Prerogative of Mercy.
 (6) A reference in this article to conviction or imposition
 of a punishment, sentence, or forfeiture includes conviction or
 imposition of a punishment, penalty, sentence or forfeiture by a
 court martial or other military tribunal except a Field Court
 Martial.
 International Relations.
 122. (1) The President may, with the approval of Parliament, Diplomatic
 appoint Ambassadors and Heads of Diplomatic missions.   reprsenta-
 (2) The President may receive envoys accredited to
 Uganda.
 123. (1) The President or a person authorised by the President Execution
 may make treaties, conventions, agreements, or other arrange- of treaAs,
 conventions
 ments between Uganda and any other country or between and agre-
 Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of
 any matter.
 (2) Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of
 treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made
 under clause (1) of this article.
 
 
 Declaration of a State of War.
 
 Declaration  124. (1) The President may, with the approval of Parliament,
 oasaeOf given by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of all
 the members of Parliament, declare that a state of war exists
 between Uganda and any other country.
 (2) Where it is impracticable to seek the approval of
 Parliament before declaration of a state of war, the President may
 declare a state of war without the approval but shall seek the
 approval immediately after the declaration and in any case not
 later than seventy-two hours after the declaration.
 (3) Where the President makes the declaration of a state
 of war under clause (2) when Parliament is in recess, the Speaker
 shall, immediately summon Parliament to an emergency session
 to sit within seventy-two hours after the declaration of a state of
 war.
 (4) The President may, with the approval of Parliament,
 given by resolution, revoke a declaration of a state of war made
 under clause (1) or (2) of this article.
 National Planning Authority.
 National   125. There shall be a National Planning Authority whose com-
 Planning  position and functions shall be prescribed by Parliament.
 Authority.
 
 
 CHAPTER EIGHT
 
 THE JUDICIARY
 Administration of Justice.
 126. (1) Judicial power is derived from the people and shall be Exercise of
 exercised by the courts established under this Constitution in the judicial
 name of the people and in conformity with law and with the values, p)r
 norms and aspirations of the people.
 (2) In adjudicating cases of both a civil and criminal
 nature, the courts shall, subject to the law, apply the following
 principles-
 (a) justice shall be done to all irrespective of their social
 or economic status;
 (b) justice shall not be delayed;
 (c) adequate compensation shall be awarded to victims of
 wrongs;
 (d) reconciliation between parties shall be promoted; and
 (e) substantive justice shall be administered without
 undue regard to technicalities.
 127. Parliament shall make law providing for participation p
 of the people in the administration of justice by the courts.  Of t
 the ndin -
 ft admlas-
 tration d
 128. (1) In the exercise of judicial power, the courts shall be  Wep.n-
 independent and shall not be subject to the-control or direction of d  od
 any person or authority.                                Jiny.
 
 
 (2) No person or authority shall interfere with the courts
 or judicial officers in the exercise of their judicial functions.
 (3) All organs and agencies of the State shall accord to
 the courts such assistance as may be required to ensure the effec-
 tiveness of the courts.
 (4) A person exercising judicial power shall not be liable
 to any action or suit for any act or omission by that person in the
 exercise of judicial power.
 (5) The administrative expenses of the Judiciary includ-
 ing all salaries, allowances, gratuities and pensions payable to or
 in respect of persons serving in the Judiciary, shall be charged on
 the Consolidated Fund.
 (6) The Judiciary shall be self-accounting and may deal
 directly with the Ministry responsible for finance in relation to
 its finances.
 (7) The salary, allowances, privileges and retirement
 benefits and other conditions of service of a judicial officer or
 other. person exercising judicial power, shall not be varied to
 his or her disadvantage.
 (8).The office of the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice,
 Principal Judge, a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of
 Appeal or a Judge of the High Court shall not be abolished when
 there is a substantive holder of that office.
 The Courts of Judicature.
 The co'us   129. (1) The judicial power of Uganda shall be exercised by
 of       the Courts of Judicature which shall consist of-
 Judicature.  teCut
 (a) the Supreme Court of Uganda;
 (b) the Court of Appeal of Uganda;
 (c) the High Court of Uganda; and
 
 
 (d) such subordinate courts as Parliament may by law
 establish, including Qadhis' courts for marriage,
 divorce, inheritance of property and guordianship,
 as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (2) The Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High
 Court of Uganda shall be superior courts of record and shall each
 have all the powers of such a court.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 Parliament may make provision for the jurisdiction and
 procedure of the courts.
 The Supreme Court of Uganda.
 130. The Supreme Court shall consist of-               suprem
 Court of
 Uganda.
 (a) the Chief Justice; and
 (b) such number of Justices of the Supreme Court not
 being less than six, as Parliament may by law
 prescribe.
 131. (1) The Supreme Court shall be duly constituted at any  Composition
 of te
 sitting if it consists of an uneven number not being less than five supree
 members of the Court.                                    cour.
 (2) When hearing appeals from decisions of the Court of
 Appeal sitting as a Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court shall
 consist of a full bench of all members of the Supreme Court; and
 where any of them is not able to attend, the President shall, for
 that purpose, appoint an Acting Justice under clause (2) of article
 142 of this Constitution.
 (3) The Chief Justice shall preside at each sitting of the
 Supreme Court and in the absence of the Chief Justice, the most
 senior member of the Court as constituted shall preside.
 
 
 Jurisdiction  132. (1) The Supreme Court shall be the final court of appeal.
 of Supreme
 Court.
 (2) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from such
 decisions of the Court of Appeal as may be prescribed by law.
 (3) Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Court of
 Appeal sitting as a Constitutional Court is entitled to appeal to
 the Supreme Court against the decision; and accordingly, an
 appeal shali lie to the Supreme Court under clause (2) of this article.
 (4) The Supreme Court may, while treating its own
 previous decisions as normally binding, depart from a previous
 decision when it appears to it right to do so; and all other courts
 shall be bound to follow the decisions of the Supreme Court on
 questions of law.
 Admini-     133. (1) The Chief Justice-
 strative
 functions of
 the Chief       (a) shall be the head of the judiciary and shall be responsi-
 Justce.             ble for the administration and supervision of all
 courts in Uganda; and
 (b) may issue orders and directions to the courts necessary
 for the proper and efficient administration of justice.
 (2) Where the office of the Chief Justice is vacant or where
 the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform the functions
 of his or her office, then until a person has been appointed to and
 has assumed the functions of that office or until the Chief Justice
 has resumed the performance of those functions, those functions
 shall be performed by the Deputy Chief Justice.
 The Court of Appeal of Uganda.
 Court of    134. (1) The Court of Appeal of Uganda shall consist of-
 Appeal of
 Ugand&
 (a) the Deputy Chief Justice; and
 
 
 (b) such number of Justices of Appeal not being less than
 seven as Parliament may by law prescribe.
 (2) An appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal from such
 decisions of the High Court as may be prescribed by law.
 135. (1) The Court of Appeal shall be duly constituted at any Composition
 sitting if it consists of an uneven number not being less than of the Court
 three members of the Court.                             of Appeal.
 (2) The Deputy Chief Justice shall preside at each sitting
 of the court and in the absence of the Deputy Chief Justice, the
 most senior member of the Court as constituted shall preside.
 (3) The Chief Justice, in consultation with the Deputy
 Chief Justice, may create divisions of the Court of Appeal as the
 Chief Justice may consider necessary-
 (a) consisting of such numbers of Justices of Appeal as
 may be assigned to them by the Chief Justice;
 (b) sitting at such places in Uganda as the Chief Justice
 may, after consultation with the Attorney-General,
 by statutory order, determine.
 136. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 133 of this Admini-
 Constitution, the Deputy Chief Justice shall-           functive
 functions of
 the Deputy
 (a) deputise for the Chief Justice as and when the need Chief
 arises;                                      Justice.
 (b) be the head of the Court of Appeal and in that capacity
 assist the Chief Justice in the administration of that
 Court; and
 (c) perform such other functions as may be delegated or
 assigned to him or her by the Chief Justice.
 (2) Where-
 
 
 (a) the office of the Deputy Chief Justice is vacant; or
 
 (b) the Deputy Chief Justice is acting as Chief Justice; or
 (c) the Deputy Chief Justice is for any reason unable to
 perform the functions of his or her office;
 then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the
 functions of the office of the Deputy Chief Justice, those func-
 tions shall be performed by a Justice of the Supreme Court or
 a Justice of Appeal designated by the President, after consultation
 with the Chief Justice, or the acting Chief Justice, as the case may be.
 The Constitutional Court.
 Questions   137. (1) Any question as to the interpretation of this
 as to inter-  Constitution shall be determined by the Court of Appeal sitting
 pretation of
 the       as the Constitutional Court.
 Constitution.
 (2) When sitting as a Constitutional Court, the Court of
 Appeal shall consist of a bench of five members of that Court.
 (3) A person who alleges that-
 (a) an Act of Parliament or any other law or anything in
 or done under the authority of any law; or
 (b) any act or omission by any person or authority,
 is inconsistent with or in contravention of a provision of this
 Constitution, may petition the Constitutional Court for a declara-
 tion to that effect, and for redress where appropriate.
 (4) Where upon determination of the petition under
 clause (3) of this article the Constitutional Court considers that
 there is need for redress in addition to the declaration sought, the
 Constitutional Court may-
 (a) grant an order of redress; or
 (b) refer the matter to the High Court to investigate and
 determine the appropriate redress.
 
 
 (5) Where any question as to the interpretation of this
 Constitution arises in any proceedings in a court of law other
 than a Field Court Martial, the Court-
 (a) may, if it is of the opinion that the question involves a
 substantial question of law; and
 (b) shall, if any party to the proceedings requests it to do so,
 refer the question to the Constitutional Court for decision in
 accordance with clause (1) of this article.
 (6) Where any question is referred to the Constitutional
 Court under clause (5) of this article, the Constitutional Court
 shall give its decision on the question and the court in which the
 question arises shall dispose of the case in accordance with that
 decision.
 (7) Upon a petition being made or a question being
 referred under this article, the Court of Appeal shall proceed to
 hear and determine the petition as soon as possible and may, for
 that purpose, suspend any other matter pending before it.
 The High Court of Uganda.
 138. (1) The High Court of Uganda shall consist of-      High Court
 of Uganda.
 (a) the Principal Judge; and
 (b) such number of Judges of the High Court as may be
 prescribed by Parliament.
 (2) The High Court shall sit in such places as the Chief
 Justice may, in consultation with the Principal Judge, appoint; and
 in so doing, the Chief Justice shall, as far as practicable, ensure
 that the High Court is accessible to all the people.
 139. (1) The High Court shall, subject to the provisions of this Junisdiction
 of High
 Constitution, have unlimited original jurisdiction in all matters Cort.
 and such appellate and other jurisdiction as may be conferred on
 it by this Constitution or other law.
 
 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any
 other law, the decisions of any court lower than the High Court
 shall be appealable to the High Court.
 Hearing of  140. (1) Where any question is before the High Court for deter-
 election  mination under clause (1) of article 86 of this Constitution, the
 cases.    High Court shall proceed to hear and determine the question
 expeditiously and may, for that purpose, suspend any other matter
 pending before it.
 (2) This article shall apply in a similar manner to the
 Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court when hearing and
 determining appeals on questions referred to in clause (1) of this
 article.
 Admini-     141. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 133 of this
 strative  Constitution, the Principal Judge shall-
 functions of
 the
 Principle       (a) be the head of the High Court, and shall, in that
 Judge.                capacity, assist the Chief Justice in the administra-
 tion of the High Court and subordinate courts; and
 (b) perform such other functions as may be delegated or
 assigned to him or her by the Chief Justice.
 (2) Where-
 (a) the office of Principal Judge is vacant; or
 (b) the Principal Judge is for any reason unable to per-
 form the functions of his or her office,
 then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the
 functions of that office, or until the Principal Judge has resumed
 those functions, those functions shall be performed by a Judge of
 the High Court designated by the President after consultation
 with the Chief Justice.
 
 
 Appointments, Qualifications and Tenure of
 Office of Judicial Officers.
 142. (1) The Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, the Appoint-
 ment of
 Principal Judge, a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of judiio
 Appeal and a Judge of the High Court shall be appointed by the officers.
 President acting on the advice of the Judicial Service
 Commission and with the approval of Parliament.
 (2) Where-
 (a) the office of a Justice of the Supreme Court or a
 Justice of Appeal or a Judge of the High Court is
 vacant; or
 (b) a Justice of the Supreme Court or a Justice of Appeal
 or a Judge of the High Court is for any reason unable
 to perform the functions of his or her office; or
 (c) the Chief Justice advises the Judicial Service
 Commission that the state of business in the
 Supreme Court, Court of Appeal or the High Court
 so requires,
 the President may, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service
 Commission, appoint a person qualified for appointment as a
 Justice of the Supreme Court or a Justice of Appeal or a Judge of
 the High Court to act as such a Justice or Judge even though
 that person has attained the age prescribed for retirement in
 respect of that office.
 (3) A person appointed under clause (2) of this article to
 act as a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of Appeal or a
 Judge of the High Court shall continue to act for the period of the
 appointment or, if no period is specified, until the appointment is
 revoked by the President acting on the advice of the Judicial
 Service Commission, whichever is the earlier.
 
 
 Qualific-   143. (1) A person shall be qualified for appointment as-
 ations for
 appointment
 of judicial     (a) Chief Justice, if he or she has served as a Justice of
 officers,             the Supreme Court of Uganda or of a court having
 similar jurisdiction or has practised as an advocate
 for a period not less than twenty years before a
 court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and
 criminal matters;
 (b) Deputy Chief Justice or Principal Judge, if he or she
 has served as a Justice of the Supreme Court or as a
 Justice of Appeal or as a Judge of the High Court or
 a court of similar jurisdiction to such a court or has
 practised as an advocate for a period not less than fif-
 teen years before a court having unlimited jurisdiction
 in civil and criminal matters;
 (c) a Justice of the Supreme Court if he or she has served
 as a Justice of Appeal or a Judge of the High Court
 or a court of similar jurisdiction to such a court or
 has practised as an advocate for a period not less
 than fifteen years before a court having unlimited
 jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters;
 (d) a Justice of Appeal, if he or she has served as a Judge
 of the High Court or a court having similar or higher
 jurisdiction or has practised as an advocate for a
 period not less than ten years before a court having
 unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters
 or is a distinguished jurist and an advocate of not
 less than ten years standing;
 (e) a Judge of the High Court, if he or she is or has been
 a Judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in
 civil and criminal matters or a court having jurisdic-
 tion in appeals from any such court or has practised as
 an advocate for a period not less than ten years before
 a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and
 criminal matters.
 
 
 (2) Any period during which a person has practised as a
 public officer holding an office fox-which qualifications as an
 advocate is required, shall be counted in the calculation of any
 period of practice required under clause (1) of this article even
 though that person does not have a practising certificate.
 144. (1) A judicial officer may retire at any time after attaining  Tenure of
 the age of sixty years, and shall vacate his or her office-  office of
 judicial
 officers.
 (a) in the case of the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief
 Justice, a Justice of the Supreme Court and a Justice
 of Appeal, on attaining the age of seventy years; and
 (b) in the case of the Principal Judge and a Judge of the
 High Court, on attaining the age of sixty five years; or
 (c) in each case, subject to clause (7) of article 128 of this
 Constitution, on attaining such other age as may be
 presribed by Parliament by law;
 but a judicial officer may continue in office after attaining the
 age at which he or she is required by this clause to vacate office,
 for a period not exceeding three months necessary to enable him or
 her to complete any work pending before him or her.
 (2) A judicial officer may be removed from office only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of bod; or mind;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence;
 but only in accordance with the provisions of this article.
 (3) The President shall remove a judicial officer if the
 question of his or her removal has been referred to a tribunal
 appointed under clause (4) of this article and the tribunal has rec-
 ommended to the President that he or she ought to be removed
 from office on any ground described in clause (2) of this article.
 
 
 (4) The question whether the removal of a judicial officer
 should be investigated shall be referred to the President by either
 the Judicial Service Commission or the Cabinet with advice that
 the President should appoint a tribunal; and the President shall
 then appoint a tribunal consisting of-
 (a) in the case of the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief
 Justice or the Principal Judge, five persons who are
 or have been Justices of the Supreme Court or are
 or have been judges of a court having similar juris-
 diction or who are advocates of at least twenty
 years standing; or
 (b) in the case of a Justice of the Supreme Court or a
 Justice of Appeal, three persons who are or have
 been Justices of the Supreme Court or who are or
 have been judges of a court of similar jurisdiction
 or who are advocates of at least fifteen years
 standing; or
 (c) in the case of a Judge of the High Court, three persons
 who are or have held office as Judges of a court having
 unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters or
 a court having jurisdiction in appeals from such a
 court or who are advocates of at least ten years
 standing.
 (5) If the question of removing a judicial officer is referred
 to a tribunal under this article, the President shall suspend the
 judicial officer from performing the functions of his or her office.
 (6) A suspension under clause (5) of this article shall
 cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President that the
 judicial officer suspended should not be removed.
 (7) For the purposes of this article, "judicial officer"
 means the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, the Principal
 Judge, a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of Appeal or a
 Judge of the High Court.
 
 
 145. (1) There shall be in the Judiciary the office of Chief Registrars.
 Registrar and such number of Registrars as Parliament may by
 law prescribe.
 (2) The Chief Registrar and a Registrar shall be appointed
 by the President on the advice of the Judicial Service
 Commission.
 Judicial Service Commission.
 146. (1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission.  Judicial
 Service
 (2) The Judicial Service Commission shall, subject to ssi
 clause (3) of this article, consist of the following persons who
 shall be appointed by the President with the approval of
 Parliament-
 (a) a Chairperson and a Deputy Chairperson who shall
 be persons qualified to be appointed as Justices of
 the Supreme Court, other than the Chief Justice, the
 Deputy Chief Justice and the Principal Judge;
 (b) one person nominated by the Public Service
 Commission;
 (c) two advocates of not less than fifteen years' standing
 nominated by the Uganda Law Society;
 (d) one Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the
 President in consultation with the Judges of the
 Supreme Court, the Justices of Appeal and Judges of
 the High Court; and
 (e) two members of the public, who shall not be lawyers,
 nominated by the President.
 (3) The Attorney-General shall be an ex-officio member
 of the Commission.
 (4) The Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice and
 Principal Judge shall not be appointed to be Chairperson,
 Deputy Chairperson or member of the Judicial Service
 Commission.
 
 
 (5) A person is not qualified to be appointed a member
 of the Judical Service Commission unless the person is of high
 moral character and proven integrity.
 (6) The office of Chairperson shall be full-time and a
 person shall not engage in private legal practice while holding
 that office.
 (7) Subject to the provisions of this article, a member of
 the Judicial Service Commission shall vacate his or her office-
 (a) at the expiration of four years from the date of his or
 her appointment but is eligible for reappointment
 for one more term; or
 (b) if he or she is elected or appointed to any office deter-
 mined by Parliament to be likely to compromise the
 independence of the Judicial Service Commission; or
 (c) on being removed by the President; but the President
 may only remove a member for inability to perform
 the functions of his or her office arising from
 infirmity of body or mind or for misbehaviour,
 misconduct or incompetence.
 (8) There shall be a Secretary to the Judicial Service
 Commission who shall be appointed by the President on the
 advice of the Public Service Commission.
 Functions of  147. (1) The functions of the Judicial Service Commission are-
 Judicial
 Service        (a) to advise the President in the exercise of the
 Commui-
 ssion.               President's power to appoint persons to hold or act
 in any office specified in clause (3) of this article,
 which includes power to confirm appointments, to
 exercise disciplinary control over such persons and
 to remove them from office;
 (b) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, to
 review and make recommendations on the terms
 and conditions of service of Judges and other
 judicial officers;
 
 
 (c) to prepare and implement programmes for the educa-
 tion of, and for the dissemination of information to
 judicial officers and the public about law and the
 administration of justice;
 (d) to receive and process people's recommendations and
 complaints concerning the Judiciary and the admin-
 istration of justice and generally, to act as a link
 between the people and the Judiciary;
 (e) to advise the Government on improving the adminis-
 tration of justice; and
 0f any other function prescribed by this Constitution or
 by Parliament.
 (2) In the performance of its functions, the Judicial
 Service Commission shall be independent and shall not be
 subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.
 (3) The offices referred to in paragraph (a) of clause (1)
 of this article are-
 (a) the office of the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief
 Justice, the Principal Judge, a Justice of the
 Supreme Court, a Justice of Appeal and a Judge of
 the High Court; and
 (b) the office of Chief Registrar and Registrar.
 148. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Judicial Appoint-
 mriet of
 Service Commission may appoint persons to hold or act in any other
 judicial office other than the offices specified in clause (3) of judicial
 article 147 of this Constitution and confirm appointments in and officm*
 exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such
 offices and remove such persons from office.
 149. Every judicial officer shall, before assuming the duties of judia
 his or her office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath.
 Judicial Oath specified in the Fourth Schedule to this
 Constitution.
 
 
 Power to    150. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 make laws
 relating to  Parliament may make laws providing for the structures, proce-
 Judiciary.  dures and functions of the Judiciary.
 (2) Without   prejudice to clause (1) of this article,
 Parliament may make laws for regulating and facilitating the dis-
 charge by the President and the Judicial Service Commission of
 their functions under this Chapter.
 Inter-      151. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires-
 pretation.
 "judicial officer" means-
 (a) a Judge or any person who presides over a court or tri-
 bunal howsoever described;
 (b) the Chief Registrar or a Registrar of a court;
 (c) such other person holding any office connected with a
 court as may be prescribed by law.
 
 
 CHAPTER NINE
 
 FINANCE
 General.
 152. (1) No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of Tafaion.
 an Act of Parliament.
 (2) Where a law enacted under clause (1) of this article
 confers powers on any person or authority to waive or vary a tax
 imposed by that law, that person or authority shall report to
 Parliament periodically on the exercise of those powers, as shall
 be determined by law.
 (3) Parliament shall make laws to establish tax tribunals
 for the purposes of settling tax disputes.
 153. (1) There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which shall Coslidamd
 be paid all revenues or other moneys raised or received for the Fun.
 purpose of, or on behalf of, or in trust for the Government.
 (2) The revenues or other moneys referred to in clause (1)
 of this article shall not include revenues or other moneys-
 (a) that are payable by or under an Act of Parliament, into
 some other fund established for a specific purpose; or
 (b) that may, under an Act of Parliament, be retained by
 the department of Government that received them for
 the purposes of defraying the expenses of that
 department.
 154. (1) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated witmwa,
 fimt
 Fund except-                                            Com
 Fund.
 (a) to meet expenditure charged on the fund by this
 Constitution or by an Act of Parliament; or
 
 
 (b) where the issue of those moneys has been authorised
 by  an Appropriation   Act, a Supplementary
 Appropriation Act or as provided under clause (4) of
 this article.
 (2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public
 fund of Uganda other than the Consolidated Fund, unless the
 issue of those moneys has been authorised by law.
 (3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated
 Fund unless the withdrawal has been approved by the Auditor-
 General and in the manner prescribed by Parliament.
 (4) If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act
 in respect of any financial year, will not or has not come into
 operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President
 may, subject to the provisions of this article, authorise the issue
 of moneys from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes
 of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the
 Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning
 of that financial year or the coming into operation of the
 Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier.
 (5) Any sum issued in any financial year from the
 Consolidated Fund Account under clause (4) of this article in
 respect of any service of the Government-
 (a) shall not exceed the amount shown as required on
 account in respect of that service in the vote on
 account approved by Parliament by resolution for
 that financial year; and
 (b) shall be set off against the amount provided in respect
 of that service in the Appropriation Act for that
 financial year when that law comes into operation.
 Financial  155. (1) The President shall cause to be prepared and laid
 ym eti-  before Parliament in each financial year but in any case not later
 mrtes.
 than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial
 year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for
 the next financial year.
 100
 
 
 (2) The head of any self-accounting department,
 commission or organisation set up under this Constitution,
 shall cause to be submitted to the President at least two months
 before the end of each financial year, estimates of administrative
 and development expenditure and estimates of revenues of the
 respective department, commission or organisation for the
 following year.
 (3) The estimates prepared under clause (2) of this article
 shall be laid before Parliament by the President under clause (1)
 of this article without revision but with any recommendations
 that the Government may have on them.
 (4) At any time before Parliament considers the estimates
 of revenues and expenditure laid before it by or on the authority
 of the President, an appropriate committee of Parliament may
 discuss and review the estimates and make appropriate recom-
 mendations to Parliament.
 (5) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (1) of this
 article, the President may cause to be prepared and laid before
 Parliament-
 (a) fiscal and monetary programmes and plans for economic
 and social development covering periods exceeding
 one year;
 (b) estimates of revenue and expenditure covering periods
 exceeding one year.
 (6) Parliament may make laws for giving effect to the
 provisions of this article.
 156. (1) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates, Appmopria-
 other than expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by this tin Bill.
 Constitution or any Act of Parliament, shall be included in a bill
 to be known as an Appropriation Bill which shall be introduced
 into Parliament to provide for the issue from the Consolidated
 Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the
 appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified in the bill.
 
 
 (2) If in respect of any financial year it is found-
 
 (a) that the amount appropriated for any purpose under
 the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need
 has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no
 amount has been appropriated by that Act; or
 (b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose
 in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose
 or for a purpose for which amount has been appro-
 priated by that Act,
 a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall
 be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expendi-
 ture, within four months after the money is spent.
 (3) Where, in respect of any financial year, a supplementary
 estimate or supplementary estimates have been approved by
 Parliament in accordance with clause (2) of this article, a sup-
 plementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced into
 Parliament in the financial year next following that financial
 year to which the estimates relate, providing for the appropriation
 of the sums so approved for the purposes specified in those
 estimates.
 Continge-  157. Parliament shall make provision for the establishment
 ncies Fund. of a Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the
 operations of that fund.
 Offices the  158. (1) Where any salary or allowance of the holder of any
 remunera-  office is charged on the Consolidated Fund, it shall not be altered
 tion of
 which is  to his or her disadvantage after he or she has been appointed to
 charged on
 Codtd that office.
 Fund.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 Parliament shall prescribe the  offices, the salaries and
 allowances in respect of which are charged on the Consolidated
 Fund by this Constitution.
 
 
 159. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Power of
 Government
 Government may borrow from any source.                 to borrow or
 lend.
 (2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan
 on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or
 person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (3) An Act of Parliament made under clause (2) of this
 article shall provide-
 (a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid
 before Parliament and shall not come into operation
 unless they have been approved by a resolution of
 Parliament; and
 (b) that any moneys received in respect of that loan shall
 be paid into the Consolidated Fund and form part of
 that Fund or into some other public fund which is
 existing or is created for the purpose of the loan.
 (4) The President shall, at such times as Parliament may
 determine, cause to be presented to Parliament such information
 concerning any loan as is necessary to show-
 (a) the extent of the total indebtedness by way of principal
 and accumulated interest;
 (b) the provision made for servicing or repayment of the
 loan; and
 (c) the utilisation and performance of the loan.
 (5) Parliament may, by resolution, authorise the Government
 to enter into an agreement for the giving of a loan or a grant out of
 any public fund or public account.
 (6) An agreement entered into under clause (5) of this
 article shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into
 operation unless it has been approved by Parliament by resolution.
 
 
 (7) For the purposes of this article, the expression "loan"
 includes any money lent or given to or by the Government on
 condition of return or repayment and any other form of borrowing
 or lending in respect of which-
 (a) moneys from the Consolidated Fund or any other public
 fund may be used for payment or repayment; or
 (b) moneys from any fund by whatever name called, estab-
 lished for the purposes of payment or repayment
 whether in whole or in part and whether directly or
 indirectly, may be used for payment or repayment.
 (8) Parliament may by law exempt any categories of
 loans from the provisions of clauses (2) and (3) of this article,
 subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.
 Public Debt.  160. (1) The Public Debt of Uganda shall be charged on the
 Consolidated Fund and other public funds of Uganda.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, the Public Debt
 includes the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in
 respect of that debt and the costs, charges and expenses incidental
 to the management of that debt.
 Central Bank of Uganda.
 The central  161. (1) The Bank of Uganda shall be the central bank of
 bank.    Uganda and it shall be the only authority to issue the currency of
 Uganda.
 (2) The authority of the Bank of Uganda shall vest in a
 Board which shall consist of a Governor, a Deputy Governor and
 not more than five other members.
 (3) The Governor, the Deputy Governor and all other
 members of the Board shall-
 (a) be appointed by the President with the approval of
 Parliament;
 
 
 (b) hold office for a term of five years but shall be eligible
 for re-appointment.
 (4) The office of Governor and Deputy Governor shall
 each be a public office and the Governor and Deputy Governor
 shall respectively be Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the
 Board.
 (5) The Governor, the Deputy Governor or any other
 member of the Board may be removed from office by the
 President only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 162. (1) The Bank of Uganda shall-                    Functions of
 the Bank.
 (a) promote and maintain the stability of the value of the
 currency of Uganda;
 (b) regulate the currency system in the interest of the
 economic progress of Uganda;
 (c) encourage and promote economic development, and
 the efficient utilisation of the resources of Uganda
 through effective and efficient operation of a banking
 and credit system; and
 (d) do all such other things not inconsistent with this article,
 as may be prescribed by law.
 (2) In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall
 conform to this Constitution but shall not be subject to the direction
 or control of any person or authority.
 
 
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 Parliament may make laws prescribing and regulating the func-
 tions of the Bank of Uganda.
 Auditor-General.
 Auditor-    163. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General who shall be
 Generl,   appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament and
 whose office shall be a public office.
 (2) A person shall not be appointed Auditor-General
 unless that person-
 (a) is a qualified accountant of not less than fifteen years'
 standing; and
 (b) is a person of high moral character and proven integrity.
 (3) The Auditor-General shall-
 (a) audit and report on the public accounts of Uganda and
 of all public offices including the courts, the central
 and local government administrations, universities
 and public institutions of like nature, and any public
 corporation or other bodies or organisations estab-
 lished by an Act of Parliament; and
 (b) conduct financial and value for money audits in respect of
 any project involving public funds.
 (4) The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually
 a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of
 this article for the financial year immediately preceding.
 (5) Parliament shall, within six months after the submis-
 sion of the report referred to in clause (4) of this article, debate
 and consider the report and take appropriate action.
 (6) Subject to clause (7) of this article, in performing his
 or her functions, the Auditor-General shall not be under the
 direction or control of any person or authority.
 
 
 (7) The President may, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Cabinet, require the Auditor-General to audit the
 accounts of any body or organisation referred to in clause (3) of
 this article.
 (8) The salary and allowances payable to the Auditor-
 General shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 (9) The accounts of the office of the Auditor-General shall
 be audited and reported upon by an auditor appointed by
 Parliament.
 (10) The Auditor-General may be removed from office by
 the President only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 164. (1) The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in Accounta-
 charge of a Ministry or department shall be accountable to bility.
 Parliament for the funds in that Ministry or department.
 (2) Any person holding a political or public office who
 directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing
 instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that
 use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she
 has ceased to hold that office.
 (3) Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public
 funds.
 
 
 CHAPTER TEN
 
 THE PUBLIC SERVICE
 Public Service Commission.
 Public     165. (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission.
 Service
 Commission.
 (2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, a
 Deputy Chairperson and seven other members appointed by the
 President with the approval of Parliament.
 (3) A person is not qualified to be appointed a member of
 the Commission unless he or she is of high moral character and
 proven integrity.
 (4) A person holding any of the following offices
 shall relinquish his or her position in that office on appoint-
 ment as a member of the Commission-
 (a) a member of Parliament;
 (b) a member of a local government council;
 (c) a member of the executive of a political party or political
 organisation; or
 (d) a public officer.
 (5) A member of the Commission shall hold office for a
 term of four years but is eligible for re-appointment; except that
 of the first members appointed under this Constitution, four
 shall be appointed to hold office for three years which shall be
 specified in their instruments of appointment.
 (6) The emoluments of the members of the Commission
 shall be prescribed by Parliament and shall be charged on the
 Consolidated Fund.
 
 
 (7) In the absence of both the Chairperson and the
 Deputy Chairperson, the President may designate one of the
 members to act as Chairperson.
 (8) A member of the Commission may be removed from
 office by the President only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 166. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the Functions of
 functions of the Public Service Commission include-     Public
 Service
 Commi-
 (a) to advise the President in performing his or her func-
 tions under article 172 of this Constitution;
 (b) to appoint, promote and exercise disciplinary control
 over persons holding office in the public service of
 Uganda as provided in article 172 of this
 Constitution;
 (c) to review the terms and conditions of service, standing
 orders, training and qualifications of public officers
 and matters connected with personnel management
 and development of the public service and make
 recommendations on them to Government;
 (d) to guide and co-ordinate District Service Commissions;
 (e) to hear and determine grievances from persons
 appointed by District Service Commissions; and
 (f to perform such other functions as may be prescribed
 by this Constitution or any other law.
 109
 
 
 (2) In the exercise of its functions, the Public Service
 Commission shall be independent and shall not be subject to the
 direction or control of any person or authority; except that it shall
 take into account government policy relating to the public service.
 (3) The Comnmission shall make a report to Parliament in
 respect of each year, on the performance of its functions.
 (4) Parliament shall, by law, empower the Public Service
 Commission to make regulations for the effective and efficient per-
 formance of its functions under this Constitution or any other law.
 Education Service Commission.
 Education   167. (1) There shall be an Education Service Commission.
 Service
 ssion.          (2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and six
 other members appointed by the President with the approval of
 Parliament.
 (3) The President shall appoint not more than two mem-
 bers of the Commission as Deputy Chairpersons of the
 Commission.
 (4) A person is not qualified to be a member of the
 Commission unless he or she is of high moral character and proven
 integrity and has substantial experience in the field of education.
 (5) A person holding any of the following offices shall
 relinquish his or her position in that office on appointment as a
 member of the Commission-
 (a) a member of Parliament;
 (b) a member of a local government council;
 (c) a member of the executive of a political party or political
 organisation;
 (d) a member of any board or other authority responsible
 for the management of any school or college; or
 
 
 (e) a public officer.
 
 (6) A member of the Education Service Commission
 shall hold office for four years but is eligible for re-appointment;
 except that of the first members appointed under this
 Constitution, three shall be appointed to hold office for three
 years which shall be specified in their instruments of appointment.
 (7) The emoluments of members of the Commission shall
 be prescribed by Parliament and shall be charged on the
 Consolidated Fund.
 (8) In the absence of both the Chairperson and Deputy
 Chairpersons, the President may designate one of the members
 to act as Chairperson.
 (9) A member of the Commission may be removed from
 office by the President only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind; or
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 168. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Functions of
 Education
 Education Service Commission shall-                     sice
 Commi-
 (a) advise the President in performing, in relation to the ssn.
 education service, his or her functions under article
 172 of this Constitution;
 (b) have power to appoint persons to hold or act in any
 office in the education service, including the power
 to confirm such appointments, to exercise discipli-
 nary control over those persons and to remove them
 from office;
 
 
 (c) review the terms and conditions of service, standing
 orders, training and qualifications of public officers
 in the education service and matters connected with
 their management and welfare and make recom-
 mendations on them to Government;
 (d) perform such other functions as may be prescribed by
 this Constitution or any other law.
 (2) In the exercise of its functions, the Commission shall
 be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or con-
 trol of any person or authority; except that it shall take into
 account government policy relating to education.
 (3) The Commission may, by writing, delegate any of its
 functions to a District Service Commission or any other authority
 or officer.
 (4) The Commission shall make a report to Parliament in
 respect of each year, on the performance of its functions.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament
 shall by law regulate the functions of the Commission and
 prescribe the categories of public officers to constitute the
 education service.
 Health Service Commission.
 Health     169. (1) There shall be a Health Service Commission.
 Service
 Commi-          (2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and
 (2shsCmisinsaliosston.Carero                              n
 six other members at least three of whom shall be persons who
 have substantial experience in health science, all of whom shal.
 be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.,
 (3) The President shall appoint one member of the
 Commission as Deputy Chairperson of the Commission.
 (4) A person is not qualified to be a member of the
 Commission unless he or she is of high moral character and
 proven integrity.
 
 
 (5) A person holding any of the following offices shall
 relinquish his or her office on appointment as a member of the
 Commission-
 (a) a member of Parliament;
 (b) a member of a local government council;
 (c) a member of the executive of a political parcy or political
 organisation;
 (d) a member of any board or other authority responsible
 for the management of any Government hospital or
 similar Government establishment; or
 (e) a public officer.
 (6) A member of the Commission shall hold office for
 four years but is eligible for re-appointment; except that of the
 first members appointed under this Constitution, three shall be
 appointed to hold office for three years which shall be specified
 in their instruments of appointment.
 (7) The emoluments of members of the Commission
 shall be prescribed by Parliament and shall be charged on the
 Consolidated Fund.
 (8) In the absence of both the Chairperson and the
 Deputy Chairperson, the President may designate one of the
 members to act as Chairperson.
 (9) A member of the Commission may be removed from
 office by the President only for-
 (a) inability to perforrq the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 
 
 Functions of  170. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 Health
 Service  Health Service Commission shall-
 Commi-
 ssion.
 (a) advise the President in performing, in relation to the
 health service, his or her functions under article 172
 of this Constitution-
 (b) have power to appoint persons to hold or act in any
 office in the health service, including the power
 to confirm such appointments, to exercise disci-
 plinary control over those persons and to remove
 them from office;
 (c) review the terms and conditions of service, standing
 orders, training and qualifications of members of
 the health service and matters connected with their
 management and welfare and make recommenda-
 tions on them to Government;
 (d) perform such other functions as may be prescribed by
 this Constitution or any other law.
 (2) In the exercise of its functions, the Commission shall
 be independent and shall not be subject to the direction or con-
 trol of any person or authority; except that it shall take into
 account government policy relating to health.
 (3) The Commission may, by writing, delegate any of its
 functions to a District Service Commission or any other authority
 or officer.
 (4) The Commission shall make a report to Parliament in
 respect of each year on the perforraance of its functions.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament
 shall, by law regulate the functions of the Commission and
 prescribe the categories of public officers to constitute the
 health service.
 
 114
 
 
 General.
 
 171. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any Act Establish-
 of Parliament, the President may, after consultation with the ment of
 offices.
 appropriate service commission, establish offices in the public
 service of the Government of Uganda.
 172. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution-  Appoint-
 ment of
 public
 (a) the President may, acting in accordance with the officers.
 advice of the Public Service Commission, the
 Education Service Commission or the Health
 Service Commission as the case may be, appoint
 persons to hold or act in any office in the public ser-
 vice of Uganda of the rank of Head of Department
 or above other than those referred to in article 200
 of this Constitution, including confirmation of
 appointments, the exercise of disciplinary control
 over such persons and their removal from office;
 (b) the Public Service Commission, the Education Service
 Commission or the Health Service Commission, as
 the case may be, may appoint persons to hold or act
 in any office in the public service of Uganda other
 than those referred to in paragraph (a) of this clause
 and in article 200 of this Constitution, including the
 confirmation of their appointments and the exercise
 of disciplinary control over such persons and their
 removal from office.
 (2) Except with the consent of the President, no person
 shall be appointed under this article to act in any office on the
 personal staff of the President.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 President may delegate any ol iis or her powers under this article
 by directions in writing, to any service commission or to any other
 authority or public officer as may be prescribed by Parliament and
 may, in like manner, revoke the delegation.
 115
 
 
 Protection  173. A public officer shall not be-
 of public
 officers.       (a) victimized or discriminated against for having per-
 formed his or her duties faithfully in accordance
 with this Constitution; or
 (b) dismissed or removed from office or reduced in rank
 or otherwise punished without just cause.
 Pernent    174. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a min-
 Secretaries. istry or department of the Government of Uganda shall be under
 the supervision of a Permanent Secretary whose office shall be a
 public office.
 (2) A Permanent Secretary shall be appointed by the
 President acting in accordance with the advice of the Public
 Service Commission.
 (3) The functions of a Permanent Secretary under this
 article include-
 (a) organisation and operation of the department or ministry;
 (b) tendering advice to the responsible Minister in respect
 of the business of the department or ministry;
 (c) implementation of the policies of the Government of
 Uganda;
 (d) subject to article 164 of this Constitution, responsibility
 for the proper expenditure of public funds by or in
 connection with the department or ministry.
 Inter-      175. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires-
 pretation.
 "public officer" means any person holding or acting in an
 office in the public service;
 "public service" means service in any civil capacity of
 the Government the emoluments for which are
 payable directly from the Consolidated Fund or
 directly out of moneys provided by Parliament.
 
 
 CHAPTER ELEVEN
 
 LOCAL GOVERNMENT
 Principles and Structures of Local Government.
 176. (1) The system of local government in Uganda shall be Local
 based on the district as a unit under which there shal! be such government
 system.
 lower local governments and administrative units as Parliament
 may by law provide.
 (2) The following principles shall apply to the local gov-
 ernment system-
 (a) the system shall be such as to ensure that functions,
 powers and responsibilities are devolved and trans-
 ferred from the Government to local government
 units in a co-ordinated manner;
 (b) decentralisation shall be a principle applying to all
 levels of local government and in particular, from
 higher to lower local government units to ensure
 peoples' participation and democratic control in
 decision making;
 (c) the system shall be such as to ensure the full realisation
 of democratic governance at all local government
 levels;
 (d) there shall be established for each local government
 unit a sound financial base with reliable sources of
 revenue;
 (e) appropriate measures shall be taken to enable local
 government units to plan, initiate and execute policies
 in respect of all matters affecting the people within
 their jurisdiction;
 (f) persons in the service of local government shall be
 employed by the local governments; and
 
 
 (g) the local governments shall oversee the perfor-
 mance of persons employed by the Government to
 provide services in their areas and to monitor the
 provision of Government services or the imple-
 mentation of projects in their areas.
 (3) The system of local government shall be based on
 democratically elected councils on the basis of universal adult
 suffrage in accordance with clause (4) of article 181 of this
 Constitution.
 Di.kticts of  177. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, for
 il,.  the purposes of local government, Uganda shall be divided into
 the  districts referred to in clause (2) of article 5 of this
 Constitution.
 (2) The districts referred to in clause (1) of this article
 shall be taken to have been divided into the lower local govern-
 ment units which existed immediately before the coming into
 force of this Constitution.
 178. (1) Two or more districts shall be free to co-operate in
 "!'"'g   the areas of culture and development as set out in the Fifth
 Schedule to this Constitution and may, for that purpose, form and
 support councils, trust funds or secretariats, subject to the
 following-
 (a) such co-operation shall conform to the democratic
 principles enshrined in this Constitution;
 (b) the councils, trust funds or secretariats so formed shall
 not have power to levy taxes; but Parliament may
 make provision enabling them to raise funds in
 addition to funds made available to them by the co-
 operating districts;
 (c) the terms and conditions of the co-operation shall be
 embodied in a charter signed by the consenting districts
 and deposited with the Speaker of Parliament; and
 118
 
 
 (d) the councils, trust funds or secretariats formed under
 this article shall have power to make rules, regula-
 tions and bye-laws in relation to the functions
 assigned to them; except that such rules, regulations
 and bye-laws shall not be inconsistent with the pro-
 visions of this Constitution or any existing law and
 shall not be effective unless ratified by the district
 councils of the co-operating districts.
 (2) The councils, trust funds or secretariats formed
 under this article shall be bodies corporate with powers to sue
 and be sued.
 (3) Subject to clause (1) of this article and to the provi-
 sions of this Constitution, the districts of Buganda as specified in
 the First Schedule to this Constitution, shall be deemed to have
 agreed to co-operate on the coming into force of this
 Constitution.
 (4) Any district may withdraw from co-operation under
 this article if-
 (a) a resolution is passed by the district council of the dis-
 trict in favour of withdrawal, supported by two-thirds
 of all the members of the council; and
 (b) the resolution is supported by a resolution of
 Parliament.
 179. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Boundaries
 Parliament may-                                           of local
 government
 units.
 (a) alter the boundaries of districts; and
 (b) create new districts.
 (2) Any measure to alter the boundary of a district or to
 create a new district shall be supported by a majority of all the
 members of Parliament.
 
 
 (3) Parliament shall by law empower district councils to
 alter the boundaries of lower local government units and to create
 new local government units within their districts.
 (4) Any measure for the alteration of the boundaries of or
 the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on
 the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring
 services closer to the people and it may.take into account the
 means of communication, geographical features, density of
 population, economic viability and the wishes of the people
 concerned.,
 Local       180. (1) A local government shall be based on a council which
 government shall be the highest political authority within its area of jurisdic-
 councils.
 tion and which shall have legislative and executive powers to be
 exercised in accordance with this Constitution.
 (2) Parliament shall by law prescribe the composition,
 qualifications, functions and electoral procedures in respect of
 local government councils, except that-
 (a) the person elected as District Chairperson of a local gov-
 ernment shall be a member of the council;
 (b) one third of the membership of each local government
 council shall be reserved for women; and
 (c) any law enacted by virtue of this article shall provide
 for affirmative action for all marginalised groups
 referred to in article 32 of this Constitution;
 (d) Parliament shall exercise similar powers of review as
 stipulated in clause (2) of article 78 of this
 Constitution, in relation to paragraphs (b) and (c) of
 this clause.
 (3) A person shall not be a member of a local govern-
 ment council unless that person is a citizen of Uganda.
 
 
 181. (1) A   district shall be divided by the Electoral Elections of
 local
 Commission into electoral areas which shall be demarcated in government
 such a way that the number of inhabitants in the electoral areas councils.
 are as nearly as possible equal.
 (2) The number of inhabitants in an electoral area may be
 greater or less than other electoral areas in order to take account
 of means of communication, geographical features and density
 of population.
 (3) The demarcation of electoral areas shall ensure that a
 sub-county, a town council or an equivalent part of a municipality
 is represented at the district council by at least one person.
 (4) All local government councils shall be elected every
 four years.
 (5) Elections of all local government councils shall
 take place at least sixty days before the expiry of the term of
 the existing council, but shall not coincide with presidential or
 parliamentary elections.
 182. (1) Subject to clause (2) of this article, the mandate of an  Revocation
 elected member of a local government council may be revoked  of mandate.
 by the electorate.
 (2) Parliament shall by law prescribe the grounds on
 which and the manner in which the electorate may revoke the
 mandate of an elected member of a local government council.
 183. (1) There shall be a District Chairperson who shall-  District
 Chairperson.
 (a) be the political head of the district; and
 (b) be elected by universal adult suffrage through a secret
 ballot.
 (2) A person is not qualified to be elected District
 Chairperson unless he or she is-
 (a) qualified to be elected a member of Parliament;
 
 
 (b) at least thirty years and not more than seventy-five
 years of age; and
 (c) a person ordinarily resident in the district.
 (3) The District Chairperson shall-
 (a) preside at meetings of the executive committee of the
 district;
 (b) monitor the general administration of the district;
 (c) co-ordinate the activities of urban councils and coun-
 cils of the lower local administrative units in the
 district;
 (d) co-ordinate and monitor Government functions as
 between the district and the Government; and
 (e) perform such other functions as Parliament may
 prescribe.
 (4) In the performance of the functions under clause (3)
 of this article, the Chairperson shall be subject to the rules, deci-
 sions and recommendations of the district council and be answer-
 able to the council.
 Speaker of  184. (1) Each district council shall have a Speaker elected by
 district  the district council from among its members; but a person shall
 council.
 only be taken to have been elected if the votes cast in his or her
 favour are more than fifty per cent of all the members of the
 council.
 (2) The Speaker of the council shall, in relation to the
 council, perform similar functions to those of the Speaker of
 Parliament.
 Removal of  185. (1) The District Chairperson or the Speaker of a district
 csict    council may be removed from office by the council by resolution
 and      supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all members
 Speaker.  of the council on any of the following grounds-
 122
 
 
 (a) abuse of office;
 
 (b) misconduct or misbehaviour; or
 (c) such physical or mental incapacity as would render
 him or her incapable of performing the duties of his
 or her office.
 (2) Parliament shall prescribe any other grounds and the
 procedure for the removal of a District Chairperson or the
 Speaker of a council under this article.
 186. (1) There shall be an executive committee for each dis- District
 trict council which shall perform the executive functions of the executive
 committee.
 council.
 (2) An executive committee shall consist of-
 (a) the District Chairperson;
 (b) the Vice-Chairperson; and
 (c) such number of Secretaries as the council may decide.
 (3) The Vice-Chairperson shall be a person nominated by
 the District Chairperson from among members of the council
 and approved by two-thirds of all members of the council.
 (4) The Secretaries shall be nominated by the
 Chairperson from among members of the council and approved
 by a majority of all members of the Council.
 (5) The Vice-Chairperson shall deputise for the
 Chairperson and shall perform such other functions as may be
 assigned to him or her by the Chairperson.
 (6) If the District Chairperson dies, resigns or is removed
 from office, the Vice-Chairperson shall assume the office of
 Chairperson until the election of a new District Chairperson, but the
 election shall be held within six months after the occurrence of the
 event.
 
 
 (7) A Secretary shall have responsibility for such functions
 of the district council as the District Chairperson may, from time
 to time assign to him or her.
 (8) A district council shall appoint standing and other
 committees necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
 (9) The following shall apply with respect to the compo-
 sition of the committees of a district council-
 (a) the chairpersons and members of the committees shall
 be elected from among the members of the council;
 (b) the District Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson and
 a Secretary, shall not be members of a committee
 of the council but may take part in its proceedings
 without voting.
 Vacation of  187. (1) The office of a member of a district executive com-
 office of  mittee shall become vacant if-
 mnember of
 district
 executive      (a) the appointment of that member is revoked by the
 committee.           District Chairperson; or
 (b) that member-
 (i) is elected as Speaker of the district council;
 (ii) resigns from office;
 (iii) becomes disqualified to be a member of the district
 council;
 (iv) is unable to perform his or her functions due
 to mental or physical incapacity or dies;
 (v) is censured by the council; or
 (c) a new Chairperson assumes office.
 (2) A district council may, by resolution supported by
 not less than half of all members of the council, pass a vote of
 censure against a member of the executive committee.
 124
 
 
 (3) Proceedings for censure shall be initiated by a petition
 to the Chairperson through the Speaker signed by not less than
 one-third of all the members of the district council to the effect
 that they are dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the
 member of the executive committee.
 (4) The Chairperson shall, upon receipt of the petition,
 cause a copy of it to be given to the member of the executive
 committee in question.
 (5) The motion for the resolution of censure shall not be
 debated until the expiry of fourteen days after the petition was
 sent to the Chairperson.
 (6) A member of the executive committee in respect of
 whom a vote of censure is debated under clause (5) of this article is
 entitled during the debate to be heard in his or her defence.
 (7) Nothing in this article Lhall prevent a person from
 being re-appointed to the executive committee of a district council.
 188. (1) There shall be a Chief Administrative Officer for Chief
 Admini-
 every district.                                            strative
 (2) The Chief Administrative Officer shall be appointed  Officer.
 by the District Service Commission and shall be the chief
 accounting officer for the district.
 (3) Parliament shall by law establish the qualifications
 and functions of the Chief Administrative Officer.
 189. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Functions of
 functions and services specified in the Sixth Schedule to this Government
 and district
 Constitution shall be the responsibility of the Government.  councils.
 (2) District councils and the councils of lower local
 government units may, on request by them, be allowed to exer-
 cise the functions and services specified in the Sixth Schedule
 to this Constitution or if delegated to them by the Government
 or by Parliament by law.
 (3) District councils shall have responsibility for any
 functions and services not specified in the Sixth Schedule to this
 Constitution.
 
 
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 Government may, on request by a district council, assume
 responsibility for functions and services assigned to the
 district council.
 Finances of Local Governments.
 Planning.  190. District councils shall prepare comprehensive and inte-
 grated development plans incorporating the plans of lower level
 local governments for submission to the National Planning
 Authority.
 Power to   191. (1) Local governments shall have power to levy, charge,
 levy and
 alToate  collect and appropriate fees and taxes in accordance with any
 taxes.   law enacted by Parliament by virtue of article 152 of this
 Constitution.
 (2) The fees and taxes to be levied, charged, collected and
 appropriated under clause (1) of this article shall consist of rents,
 rates, royalties, stamp duties, personal graduated tax, cess, fees
 on registration and licensing and any other fees and taxes that
 Parliament may prescribe.
 (3) No appropriation of funds by a local government shall
 be made unless approved in a budget by its council.
 (4) Parliament shall by law make provision for tax
 appeals in relation to taxes to which this article applies.
 Collection  192. Parliament shall by law provide-
 of taxes by
 local gov-
 ernments.      (a) for the taxes that may be collected by a local govern-
 ment for or on behalf of the Government for payment
 into the Consolidated Fund;
 (b) for a local government to retain for the purposes of its
 functions and services, a specified proportion of the
 revenues collected for or on behalf of the
 Government from the district.
 
 
 193. (1) The President shall for each financial year, in accor- GMts to
 local gov-
 dance with this Constitution, cause to be presented to Parliament enments.
 proposals as to the moneys to be paid out of the Consolidated
 Fund as-
 (a) unconditional grant in accordance with clause (2) of
 this article;
 (b) conditional grant in accordance with clause (3) of this
 article;
 (c) equalisation grant in accordance with clause (4) of this
 article.
 (2) Unconditional grant is the minimum grant that shall
 be paid to local governments to run decentralised services and
 shall be calculated in the manner specified in the Seventh
 Schedule to this Constitution.
 (3) Conditional grant shall consist of moneys given to
 local governments to finance programmes agreed upon between
 the Government and the local governments; and shall be expend-
 ed only for the purposes for which it was made and in accordance
 with the conditions agreed upon.
 (4) Equalisation grant is the money to be paid to local
 governments for giving subsidies or making special provisions
 for the least developed districts; and shall be based on the degree
 to which a local government unit is lagging behind the national
 average standard for a particular service.
 (5) District councils shall be obliged to indicate how con-
 ditional and equalisation grants obtained from the Government
 are to be passed onto the lower levels of local government.
 (6) The proposals made under clause (1) of this article
 shall be made at the same time as the estimates of revenue and
 expenditure under article 155 of this Constitution and shall
 state the sums of moneys that are to be paid to each local
 government.
 
 
 (7) The proposals made under this article shall form part
 of the Appropriation Act as provided for in article 156 of this
 Constitution.
 Local      194. (1) There shall be a Local Government Finance
 Government
 Finance  Commission which shall consist of seven members appointed by
 Commi-  the President.
 ssion.
 (2) Of the seven members referred to in clause (1) of this
 article, four shall be nominated by the local governments.
 (3) The members of the Local Government Finance
 Commission shall elect from among themselves a Chairperson
 and a Vice-Chairperson.
 (4) The Local Government Finance Commission shall-
 (a) advise the President on all matters concerning the dis-
 tribution of revenue between the Government and
 local governments and the allocation to each local
 government of moneys out of the Consolidated
 Fund;
 (b) in consultation with the National Planning Authority,
 consider and recommend to the President the
 amount to be allocated as the equa!isation and con-
 ditional grants and their allocation to each local
 government;
 (c) consider and recommend to the President potential
 sources of revenue for local governments;
 (d) advise the local governments on appropriate tax levels
 to be levied by local governments;
 (e) perform such other functions as Parliament shall
 prescribe.
 (5) The expenses of the Commission, including
 salaries, allowances and pensions payable to persons serving
 with the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated
 Fund.
 
 
 195. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and with the Loms md
 approval of the Government, a local government may, for the gram.
 carrying out of its functions and services, borrow money or accept
 and use any grant or assistance as Parliament shall prescribe.
 Accou=t-
 196. Parliament shall make laws- bility.
 (a) requiring each local government to draw up a com-
 prehensive list of all its internal revenue sources
 and to maintain data on total potential collectable
 revenues;
 (b) prescribing financial control and accountability mea-
 sures for compliance by all local governments;
 (c) imposing regular audit requirements and procedures
 for local governments.
 197. Urban authorities shall have autonomy over their finan-  -
 cial and planning matters in relation to the district councils as aumy
 of urban
 Parliament may, by law provide.                         audoides.
 District Service Commissions.
 198. (1) There shall be a District Service Commission for each District
 district.                                               CommW-
 ssiow.
 (2) The District Service Commission shall consist of a
 chairperson and such other members as the district council shall
 determine, at least one of whom shall represent urban authorities
 and all of whom shall be appointed by the district council on
 the recommendation of the district executive committee with the
 approval of the Public Service Commission.
 (3) Members of a District Service Commission shall be
 persons of high moral character and proven integrity.
 (4) Members of a District Service Commission shall hold
 office for a period of four years but are eligible for re-appoint-
 ment for one more term.
 
 
 (5) In the performance of its functions, a District Service
 Commission shall conform to the standards established by the
 Public Service Commission for the public service generally.
 (6) A member of the District Service Commission may
 be removed from office by the executive committee of the district
 with the approval of the district council and after consultation with
 the Public Service Commission but may be removed only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of that office arising
 from physical or mental incapacity;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 Secondment  199. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 of staff.  Government may, on request by a district council, post persons
 to fill, assist and complement the service of a local government.
 Fumtions of 200. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 Ditrict
 se~ce    power to appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the ser-
 Commi-   vice of a district, including the power to confirm appointments,
 ssios.   to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in
 any such office and to remove those persons from office is
 vested in the District Service Commission.
 (2) The terms and conditions of service of local govern-
 ment staff shall conform with those prescribed by the Public
 Service Commission for the public service generally.
 (3) The District Service Commission may establish
 committees in respect of specialised disciplines.
 General.
 exci of    201. The functions of a district government shall be exercised
 adrminfis
 tive     in accordance with this Constitution and any other law; but the
 functi  ,  exercise of those functions shall not detract from the order, peace
 and good governance of any part of Uganda.
 
 
 202. (1) The President may, with the approval of two-thirds Take-over
 of district
 of all the members of Parliament, assume the executive and  admini-
 legislative powers of any district in any of the following cir- stration by
 President.
 cumstances-
 (a) where the district council so requests and it is in the
 public interest to do so;
 (b) where a state of emergency has been declared in that
 district or in Uganda generally; or
 (c) where it has become extremely difficult or impos-
 sible for district government to function.
 (2) The exercise by the President of the power conferred
 by this article, may be done through such persons or officers as
 the President may appoint; and the legislative functions shall be
 exercised by statutory instruments.
 (3) Unless approved by Parliament for a longer term, the
 exercise by the President of the power conferred by this article,
 shall be for a period not exceeding ninety days.
 (4) Upon the expiry of the term under clause'(3) of this
 article-
 (a) the President shall hand back the administration of the
 district to the incumbent district government; or
 (b) if Parliament decides that the prevailing circumstances
 still make it impossible for the incumbent district
 government to resume the administration of the dis-
 trict then-
 (i) where the unexpired term of the council is longer
 than twelve months, the President shall cause
 elections to be held for a new district council
 within sixty days; or
 (ii) where the unexpired term of the council is less
 than twelve months the President shall con-
 tinue to administer the district until the next
 elections are held.
 
 
 Resident    203. (1) There shall be for each district a Resident District
 District
 Commi-    Commissioner who shall be a senior civil servant appointed by
 ssioner.  the President.
 (2) The functions of a Resident District Commissioner
 are-
 (a) to co-ordinate the administration of Government
 services in the district;
 (b) to advise the District Chairperson on matters of a
 national nature that may affect the district or its
 plans and programmes and particularly the relations
 between the district and the Government; and
 (c) to carry out such other functions as may be
 assigned by the President or prescribed by
 Parliament.
 Terms and   204. Parliament shall prescribe the guidelines to be followed
 conditions  by the district councils, in determining terms and conditions of
 of service.
 service for-
 (a) members of the local government councils; and
 (b) members of the District Service Commissions and
 their committees.
 Prohibition  205. (1) No person shall hold concurrently on a full time basis,
 of holding
 political  political offices-
 offices con-
 currently.       (a) in the service of the Government and that of a local
 government; or
 (b) in the service of a higher local government and
 that of a lower local government.
 (2) In this article, "political office " means the office of a
 Minister, a member of Parliament or a member of a local gov-
 ernment council, or any other office prescribed by Parliament.
 
 132
 
 
 206. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Pament
 to make
 Parliament shall make laws relating to local Government for the laws regard-
 purpose of giving full effect to this Chapter.           ing local
 egovCnnnL
 (2) Without prejudice to the general effect of clause (1)
 of this article, Parliament may make laws-
 (a) limiting the number of political offices that may be
 created by the local governments;
 (b) enabling councils to make laws, regulations or other
 instruments for the administration of their areas of
 jurisdiction;
 (c) requiring that with appropriate modifications, the sys-
 tem of government as it operates at district level
 shall apply at the lower levels of local government
 units.
 207. In this Chapter, a reference to a local government Intw-
 includes-                                                pretation.
 (a) a district council;
 (b) an urban council;
 (c) a sub-county council; or
 (d) any other unit prescribed by law to replace any of the
 councils mentioned in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)
 of this article.
 
 
 CHAPTER TWELVE
 
 DEFENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
 Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces.
 Uganda     208. (1) There shall be armed forces to be known as the
 Peoples"  Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces.
 Defence
 Forces.        (2) The Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces shall be non-
 partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined,
 productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established
 under this Constitution.
 (3) Members of the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces
 shall be citizens of Uganda of good character.
 (4) No person shall raise an armed force except in accor-
 dance with this Constitution.
 Functions of  209. The functions of the Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces
 DEfence
 Forces.  are-
 (a) to preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial
 integrity of Uganda;
 (b) to co-operate with the civilian authority in emer-
 gency situations and in cases of natural disasters;
 (c) to foster harmony and understanding between the
 Defence Forces and civilians; and
 (d) to engage in productive activities for the development
 of Uganda.
 Pwamei     210. Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda
 (0 Zt,,atC Peoples' Defence Forces, and in particular, providing for-
 Uganda
 Peoples"
 r-oms.         (a) the organs and structures of the Uganda Peoples'
 Defence Forces;
 
 134
 
 
 (b) recruitment, appointment, promotion, discipline
 and removal of members of the Uganda Peoples'
 Defence Forces and ensuring that members of the
 Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces are recruited
 from every district of Uganda;
 (c) terms and conditions of service of members of the
 Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces; and
 (d) the deployment of troops outside Uganda.
 Uganda Police Force.
 211. (1) There shall be a police force to be known as the Uganda
 Police
 Uganda Police Force and such other police forces in Uganda as Force.
 Parliament may by law prescribe.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, every
 police force in Uganda shall be organised and administered in
 such a manner and shall have such functions as Parliament may
 by law prescribe.
 (3) The Uganda Police Force shall be nationalistic, patri-
 otic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive; and
 its members shall be citizens of Uganda of good character.
 212. The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include Functions of
 the following-                                          Uganda
 Force.
 (a) to protect life and property;
 (b) to preserve law and order;
 (c) to prevent and detect crime; and
 (d) to co-operate with the civilian authority and other
 security organs established under this Constitution
 and with the population generally.
 
 
 Command    213. (1) There shall be an Inspector-General of Police and a
 of Uganda
 Police   Deputy Inspector-General of Police.
 Force.
 (2) The Inspector-General and the Deputy Inspector-
 General of Police shall be appointed by the President with the
 approval of Parliament.
 (3) The Uganda Police Force shall be under the command
 of the Inspector-General of Police who shall be assisted by the
 Deputy Inspector-General of Police in the performance of his or
 her functions.
 (4) In the performance of the functions under clause (3)
 of this article, the Inspector-General of Police shall be subject to
 and act in accordance with the laws of Uganda; except that on
 matters of policy, the President may give directions to the
 Inspector-General.
 (5) The Inspector-General or the Deputy Inspector-
 General of Police may be removed from office by the President.
 Parliament  214. Parliament shall make laws-
 to regulate
 Uganda
 Police         (a) providing for the organisation and administration of
 Force.               the Uganda Police Force;
 (b) ensuring that members of the Uganda Police Force are
 recruited from every district of Uganda; and
 (c) regulating generally the Uganda Police Force.
 Uganda Prisons Service.
 Uganda     215. (1) There shall be a prisons service to be known as the
 Prisons
 Service.  Uganda Prisons Service.
 (2) The Uganda Prisons Service shall be nationalistic,
 patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive
 and its members shall be citizens of Uganda of good character
 recruited from every district of Uganda.
 136
 
 
 216. (1) There shall be a Commissioner of Prisons and a Commi-
 ssioner and
 Deputy Commissioner of Prisons appointed by the President Deputy
 with the approval of Parliament.                             Commi-
 ssioner of
 Prisons.
 (2) The Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner of
 Prisons may be removed by the President.
 217. Parliament shall make laws-                          Parliament
 to regulate
 Uganda
 (a) providing for the organisation, administration and  Is'
 functions of the Uganda Prisons Service;
 (b) ensuring that members of the Uganda Prisons Service
 are recruited from every district of Uganda; and
 (c) regulating generally the Uganda Prisons Service.
 Intelligence Services.
 218. (1) Parliament may by law establish intelligence services Intelligence
 and may prescribe their composition, functions and procedures. Services.
 (2) No intelligence service shall be established by the
 Government except by or under an Act of Parliament.
 National Security Council.
 219. There shall be a National Security Council which shall National
 Security
 consist of the President as Chairperson and such other members Counci.
 as Parliament may determine.
 220. The functions of the National Security Council are-  Functions of
 National
 Security
 (a) to inform and advise the President on matters relating  Council.
 to national security; and
 (b) any other functions prescribed by Parliament.
 137
 
 
 General.
 
 Security     221. It shall be the duty of the Uganda Peoples' Defence
 ionsa-  Forces and any other armed force established in Uganda, the
 tions to
 observe   Uganda Police Force and any other police force, the    Uganda
 human
 rights    Prisons Service, all intelligence services and the National
 Security Council to observe and respect human rights and free-
 doms in the performance of their functions.
 Parliament   222. Parliament shall make laws to regulate the possession and
 to regulate  use of firearms and ammunition.
 possession
 and use of
 firearms and
 ammunition.
 
 
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN
 
 INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT
 223. (1) There shall be an Inspectorate of Government.  [nspectorae
 of
 (2) The Inspectorate of Government shall consist of-  Govenmnt
 (a) the Inspector-General of Government; and
 (b) such number of Deputy Inspectors-General as
 Parliament may prescribe.
 (3) At least one of the persons referred to in clause (2) of
 this article shall be a person qualified to be appointed a Judge of
 the High Court.
 (4) The Inspector-General of Government and a Deputy
 Inspector-General shall be appointed by the President with the
 approval of Parliament and shall not, while holding office, hold
 any other office of emolument in the public service.
 (5) A person shall not be eligible for appoiritment as
 Inspector-General of Government or Deputy Inspector-General
 of Government unless that person-
 (a) is a citizen of Uganda; and
 (b) is a person of high moral character and proven integrity;
 and
 (c) possesses considerable experience and demonstrated
 competence and is of high calibre in the conduct of
 public affairs.
 (6) A person shall resign his or her office on appointment
 as an Inspector-General or a Deputy Inspector-General, if that
 person is-
 (a) a member of Parliament;
 
 
 (b) a member of a local government council; or
 
 (c) a member of the executive of a political party or
 organisation.
 (7) The Inspector-General of Government and Deputy
 Inspecto.s-General shall hold office for a term of four years but
 shall be eligible for re-appointment only once.
 (8) The remuneration and other conditions of service of
 members of the Inspectorate of Government shall be prescribed
 by Parliament and the salaries and allowances of members of the
 Inspectorate shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 Removal of  224. The Inspector-General or a Deputy Inspector-General
 Inspector-
 Ceneral ad may be removed from office by the President on the recommen-
 Deputy    dation of a special tribunal constituted by Parliament only for-
 Inspector-
 General.
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind; or
 (b) misconduct, misbehaviour or conduct unbecoming of
 the holder of the office; or
 (c) incompetence.
 Functions of  225. (1) The functions of the Inspectorate of Government shall
 'spectoae. be prescribed by Parliament and shall include the following-
 (a) to promote and foster strict adherence to the rule of
 law and principles of natural justice in administration;
 (b) to eliminate and foster the elimination of corruption,
 abuse of authority and of public office;
 (c) to promote fair, efficient and good governance in public
 offices;
 (d) subject to the provisions of this Constitution, to supervise
 the enforcement of the Leadership Code of
 Conduct;
 
 
 (e) to investigate any act, omission, advice, decision or
 recommendation by a public officer or any other
 authority to which this article applies, taken,
 made, given or done in exercise of administrative
 functions; and
 (f to stimulate public awareness about the values of con-
 stitutionalism in general and the activities of its
 office, in particular, through any media and other
 means it considers appropriate.
 (2) The Inspectorate of Government may investigate any
 matter referred to in paragraph (e) of clause (1) of this article, on
 its own initiative or upon complaint made to it by any member
 of the public, whether or not that person has personally suffered
 any injustice by reason of that matter.
 226. The jurisdiction of the Inspectorate of Government shall Jurisdiction
 cover officers or leaders whether employed in the public service of
 or not, and also such institutions, organisations or enterprises as
 Parliament may prescribe by law.
 227. The Inspectorate of Government shall be independent in Indepen-
 the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to the dence of
 direction or control of any person or authority and shall only be nspectorate.
 responsible to Parliament.
 228. The Inspectorate of Government may establish branches Btnches of
 at district and other administrative levels as it considers fit for Ispectole.
 the better performance of its functions.
 229. (1) The Inspectorate of Government shall have an indepen- Resou-
 dent budget appropriated by Parliament, and controlled by the ofs o
 Inspectorate.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the State to facilitate the
 employment by the Inspectorate of such adequate and qualified
 staff as are needed to enable the Inspectorate to perform its func-
 tions effectively and efficiently.
 
 
 Special     230. (1) The Inspectorate of Government shall have power to
 powers of
 Ispectorate. investigate, cause investigation, arrest, cause arrest, prosecute or
 cause prosecution in respect of cases involving corruption, abuse
 of authority or of public office.
 (2) The Inspector-General of Government may, during
 the course of his or her duties or as a consequence of his or her
 findings, make such orders and give such directions as are
 necessary and appropriate in the circumstances.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of any law, the Inspectorate
 of Government shall have power to enter and inspect the premis-
 es or property of any department of Government, person or of
 any authority, to call for, examine and where necessary, retain
 any document or item in connection with the case being investi-
 gated, found on the premises; and may, in those premises, carry
 out any investigation for the purpose of its functions.
 (4) The Inspectorate of Government shall, when enforcing
 the Leadership Code of Conduct, have all the powers conferred on
 it by this Chapter in addition to any other powers conferred by law.
 (5) Subject to this Constitution, Parliament shall enact
 any law necessary for enabling the Inspectorate of Government
 to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently and in par-
 ticular, to ensure that the discharge of those functions is not frus-
 trated by any person or authority.
 Reports of  231. (1) The Inspectorate of Government shall submit to
 Inspectorae. Parliament at least once in every six months, a report on the
 performance of its functions, making such recommendations as
 it considers necessary and containing such information as
 Parliament may require.
 (2) A copy of the report referred to in clause (1) of this arti-
 cle shall be forwarded by the Inspectorate of Government to the
 President; and where any matter contained in the report relates to
 the administration of any local authority, an extract of the portion
 of the report on the matter shall be forwarded to that local authority.
 
 
 (3) The Speaker shall lay before Parliament the report
 submitted under clause (1) of this article within thirty days after
 it has been submitted, if Parliament is then in session, or, if
 Parliament is not in session, within thirty days after the
 commencement of its next following session.
 232. (1) Parliament shall, subject to the provisions of this Pow-sof
 Constitution, make laws to give effect to the provisions of this  p
 Chapter.
 (2) Laws made for the purpose of this Chapter may, in
 particular, provide-
 (a) for regulating the procedure- for the making of
 complaints and requests to the Inspectorate of
 Government and for the exercise of its functions;
 (b) for conferring such powers on it and imposing
 such duties on persons concerned as are necessary
 to facilitate it in the performance of its functions;
 (c) for ensuring accessibility to the services of the
 Inspectorate by the general public and decentralising
 the exercise of those functions and where necessary,
 for enabling the delegation by the Inspectorate of any
 of those functions to other authorities or persons at
 district or lower local government levels; and
 (d) for regulating the functioning of the Inspectorate of
 Government in relation to other institutions or bodies
 established under this Constitution or any other law.
 
 
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 
 LEADERSHIP CODE OF CONDUCT
 Leadership  233. (1) Parliament shall by law establish a Leadership Code of
 Code of   Conduct for persons holding such offices as may be specified by
 Conduct.
 Parliament.
 (2) The Leadership Code of Conduct shall-
 (a) require specified officers to declare their incomes,
 assets and liabilities from time to time and how they
 acquired or incurred them, as the-case may be;
 (b) prohibit conduct-
 (i) likely to compromise the honesty, impartiality and
 integrity of specified officers; or
 (ii) likely to lead to corruption in public affairs; or
 (iii) which is detrimental to the public good or welfare
 or good governance;
 (c) prescribe the penalties to be imposed for breach of
 the Code, without prejudice to the application of
 criminal penalties prescribed for the breach in
 question;
 (d) prescribe powers, procedures and practices for ensuring
 the effective enforcement of the Code; and
 (e) make any other provision as may be necessary for
 ensuring the promotion and maintenance of honesty,
 probity, impartiality and integrity in public affairs
 and the protection of public funds and other public
 property.
 
 
 234. The Leadership Code of Conduct shall be enforced by the Enfo"-
 ment of
 Inspectorate of Government or such other authority as cod.
 Parliament may by law prescribe.
 235. Parliament may, by law, provide that a person who has Disqmatf-
 cation for
 been dismissed or removed from office by reason of breach of bth of
 the Code of Conduct shall be disqualified from holding any other cod&.
 public office whether appointive or elective and either generally or
 for a prescribed period.
 236. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, Inter-
 "specified officer" means the holder of an office to which the PMion.
 Leadership Code of Conduct applies.
 
 
 CHAPTER FIFTEEN
 
 LAND AND ENVIRONMENT
 Land.
 Land own-   237. (1) Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and
 ership.  shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure systems
 provided for in this Constitution.
 (2) Notwithstanding clause (1) of this article-
 (a) the Government or a local government may, subject to
 article 26 of this Constitution, acquire land in the
 public interest; and the conditions governing such
 acquisition shall be as prescribed by Parliament;
 (b) the Government or a local government as determined
 by Parliament by law, shall hold in trust for the people
 and protect, natural lakes, rivers, wetlands, forest
 reserves, game reserves, national parks and any land
 to be reserved for ecological and touristic purposes
 for the common good of all citizens;
 (c) non-citizens may acquire leases in land in accordance
 with the laws prescribed by Parliament and the laws
 so prescribed shall define a non-citizen for the
 purposes of this paragraph.
 (3) Land in Uganda shall be owned in accordance
 with the following land tenure systems-
 (a) customary;
 (b) freehold;
 (c) mailo; and
 (d) leasehold.
 
 
 (4) On the coming into force of this Constitution-
 
 (a) all Uganda citizens owning land under customary
 tenure may acquire certificates of ownership in a
 manner prescribed by Parliament; and
 (b) land under customary tenure may be converted to
 freehold land ownership by registration.
 (5) Any lease which was granted to a Uganda citizen
 out of public land may be converted into freehold in accordance
 with a law which shall be made by Parliament.
 (6) For the purposes of clause (5) of this article, "public
 land" includes statutory leases to urban authorities.
 (7) Parliament shall make laws to enable urban authorities
 to enforce and to implement planning and development.
 (8) Upon the coming into force of this Constitution and
 until Parliament enacts an appropriate law under clause (9) of this
 article, the lawful or bonafide occupants of mailo land, freehold or
 leasehold land shall enjoy security of occupancy on the land.
 (9) Within two years after the first sitting of Parliament
 elected under this Constitution, Parliament shall enact a law-
 (a) regulating the relationship between the lawful or
 bonafide occupants of land referred to in clause (8)
 of this article and the registered owners of that land;
 (b) providing for the acquisition of registrable interest in.
 the land by the occilpant.
 Uganda Land Commission.
 238. (1) There shall be a commission to be known as the uvgd
 Uganda Land Commission.                                 cbmxim
 
 
 (2) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and
 not less than four other members appointed by the President with
 the approval of Parliament.
 (3) A person holding office as a member of Parliament
 or a member of a local government council shall relinguish
 that office upon appointment as a member of the Commission.
 (4) The members of the Commission shall hold office for
 a period of five years and shall be eligible to be re-appointed.
 (5) A member of the Commission may be removed from
 office by the President only for-
 (a) inability to perform the functions of his or her office
 arising from infirmity of body or mind;
 (b) misbehaviour or misconduct; or
 (c) incompetence.
 (6) The salaries and allowances of the members of the
 Commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
 Fuions of  239. The Uganda Land Commission shall hold and manage any
 Lmd      land in Uganda vested in or acquired by the Government of
 Com~i-   Uganda in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and
 Ssim
 shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by
 Parliament.
 District Land Boards.
 District   240. (1) There shall be a District Land Board for each district.
 Land
 Boads.
 (2) Parliament shall prescribe the membership, procedure
 and terms of service of a District Land Board.
 
 
 241. (1) The functions of a District Land Board are-    Functions of
 District
 Land
 (a) to hold and allocate land in the district which is not Boards.
 owned by any person or authority;
 (b) to facilitate the registration and transfer of interests in
 land; and
 (c) to deal with all other matters connected with land in
 the district in accordance with laws made by
 Parliament.
 (2) In the performance of its functions, a District Land
 Board shall be independent of the Uganda Land Commission and
 shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or
 authority but shall take into account national and District Council
 policy on land.
 General.
 242. Government may, under laws made by Parliament and Land use.
 policies made from time to time, regulate the use of land.
 243. (1) Parliament shall by law provide for the establishment Land
 of land tribunals.                                        tribunals.
 (2) The jurisdiction of a land tribunal shall include-
 (a) the determination of disputes relating to the grant,
 lease, repossession, transfer or acquisition of land
 by individuals, the Uganda Land Commission or
 other authority with responsibility relating to land;
 and
 (b) the determination of any disputes relating to the
 amount of compensation to be paid for land
 acquired.
 (3) The Chairperson of a land tribunal established under
 this article shall be appointed on the advice of the Judicial
 Service Commission under any law made for the purposes of
 clause (1) of this article.
 
 
 (4) A member of a land tribunal shall hold office on terms
 and conditions determined under a law made by Parliament under
 this article.
 (5) A law made under this article may prescribe the practice
 and procedure for land tribunals and shall provide for a right of
 appeal from a decision of a land tribunal to a court of law.
 Minerals    244. (1) Subject to clause (2) of this article, Parliament shall
 make laws regulating-
 (a) the exploitation of minerals;
 (b) the sharing of royalties arising from mineral exploitation;
 (c) the conditions for payment of indemnities arising out of
 exploitation of minerals; and
 (d) the conditions regarding the restoration of derelict
 lands.
 (2) Minerals and mineral ores shall be exploited taking
 into account the interests of the individual land
 owners, local governments and the Government.
 (3) For the purpose of this article, "mineral" does not
 include clay, murram, sand or any stone commonly used for
 building or similar purposes.
 Environment.
 Protection  245. Parliament shall, by law, provide for measures intended-
 and pre-
 servation of
 the environ-    (a) to protect and preserve the environment from abuse,
 ment.                pollution and degradation;
 (b) to manage the environment for sustainable development,
 and
 (c) to promote environmental awareness.
 
 
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN
 
 INSTITUTION OF TRADITIONAL OR CULTURAL LEADERS
 246. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Institution
 institution of traditional leader or cultural leader may exist in tdiion
 any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs and or cultural
 traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it
 applies.
 (2) In any community, where the issue of traditional or
 cultural leader has not been resolved, the issue shall be resolved
 by the community concerned using a method prescribed by
 Parliament.
 (3) The following provisions shall apply in relation to
 traditional leaders or cultural leaders-
 (a) the institution of traditional leader or cultural leader
 shall be a corporation sole with perpetual succession
 and with capacity to sue and be sued and to hold
 assets or properties in trust for itself and the people
 concerned;
 (b) nothing in paragraph (a) shall be taken to prohibit a
 traditional leader or cultural leader from holding
 any asset or property acquired in a personal capacity;
 (c) a traditional leader or cultural leader shall enjoy such
 privileges and benefits as may be conferred by the
 Government and local government or as that leader
 may be entitled to under culture, custom and tradition;
 (d) subject to paragraph (c) of this clause, no person shall
 be compelled to pay allegiance or contribute to the
 cost of maintaining a traditional leader or cultural
 leader;
 
 
 (e) a person shall not, while remaining a traditional
 leader or cultural leader, join or participate in partisan
 politics;
 (f) a traditional leader or cultural leader shall not have or
 exercise any administrative, legislative or executive
 powers of Government or local government.
 (4) The allegiance and privileges accorded to a traditional
 leader or a cultural leader by virtue of that office shall not be
 regarded as a discriminatory practice prohibited under article 21
 of this Constitution; but any custom, practice, usage or tradition
 relating to a traditional leader or cultural leader which detracts
 from the rights of any person as guaranteed by this Constitution,
 shall be taken to be prohibited under that article.
 (5) For the avoidance of doubt, the institution of tradi-
 tional leader or cultural leader existing immediately before the
 coming into force of this Constitution shall be taken to exist in
 accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
 (6) For the purposes of this article, "traditional leader or
 cultural leader" means a king or similar traditional leader or
 cultural leader by whatever name called, who derives allegiance
 from the fact of birth or descent in accordance with the customs,
 traditions, usage or consent of the people led by that traditional
 or cultural leader.
 
 
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
 
 GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS
 247. Parliament shall-                                 Adinnistra-
 tion of
 estates.
 (a) by law establish an efficient, fair and expeditious
 machinery for the administration and management
 of the estates of deceased persons; and
 (b) under the law referred to in paragraph (a) of this
 article, ensure that the services of the department
 or organisation established for the purpose are
 decentralised and accessible to all persons who
 may reasonably require those services and that the
 interests of all beneficiaries are adequately protected.
 248. (1) There shall be a Law Reform Commission for Law
 Uganda the composition and functions of which shall be prescribed Reform
 Commiussion.
 by Parliament by law.
 (2) The Law Reform Commission established under
 clause (1) of this article shall publish periodic reports on its
 findings and submit annual reports to Parliament.
 249. (1) There shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Disaster
 Preparednes
 Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural aedness
 and man-made disasters.                                  Maageent
 Commidssion.
 (2) Parliament shall, for the purposes of this article,
 prescribe the composition, functions and procedure for imple-
 mentation of the functions of the Commission.
 250. (1) Where a person has a claim against the Government, Legal pro-
 that claim may be enforced as a right by proceedings taken ceedings by
 or against
 against the Government for that purpose.                 Government.
 
 
 (2) Civil proceedings by or against the Government shall
 be instituted by or against the Attorney-General; and all documents
 required to be served on the Government for the purpose of or in
 connection with those proceedings, shall be served on the
 Attorney-General.
 (3) Parliament may by law make provision for the purposes
 of clause (1) of this article.
 (4) In th, title of any criminal proceedings, the prosecution
 shall be designaed by the word "Uganda".
 Performance  251. (1) Any commission or authority established by this
 of functions
 of Comni-  Constitution may, subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 ssis.  regulate its own procedure or confer powers or impose duties on
 any officer or authority of the Government for the purpose of
 discharging its functions.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, any
 decision of any commission or authority established by this
 Constitution shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its
 members; and it may act notwithstanding the absence of any
 member or any vacancy in the office of a member.
 (3) In this article, "commission or authority" includes a
 council and a committee of the commission or authority.
 Rsigna-    252. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any
 tiorts,  person who is appointed or elected to any office established by
 this Constitution may resign from that office by writing signed
 by that person addressed to the person or authority by whom he
 or she was appointed or elected.
 (2) The resignation of a person from any office established
 by this Constitution shall take effect in accordance with the
 terms on which that person was appointed or, if there are no such
 terms, when the writing signifying the resignation is received by
 the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by any person
 authorised by that person or authority to receive it.
 
 
 (3) For the purposes of clause (1) of this article, "office"
 includes the office of-
 (a) the Vice-President;
 (b) the Speaker and Deputy Speaker;
 (c) a Minister;
 (d) the Attorney-General;
 (e) a member of Parliament;
 (f) a member of any commission, authority, council or
 committee established by this Constitution; and
 (g) a public officer.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament
 may make laws prov:iding for the resignation of persons holding
 offices established by this Constitution not provided for in this
 article.
 253. (1) Where any person has vacated an office established  Re-appoint-
 ments and
 by this Constitution, that person may, if qualified, again be concurrnt
 appointed or elected to hold that office in accordance with the appoint-
 ments.
 provisions of this Constitution.
 (2) Where a power is conferred by this Constitution on
 any person to make any appointment to any office, he or she may
 appoint a person to that office even while another person holds
 the office, when that other person is on leave of absence pending
 the relinquishment of the office.
 (3) Where two or more persons hold the same office by
 reason of an appointment made by virtue of clause (2) of this
 article, then, for the purposes of any function conferred on the
 holder of that office, the person last appointed shall be taken to
 be the sole holder of that office.
 254. (1) A public officer shall, on retirement, receive such pen- Pension.
 sion as is commensurate with his or her rank, salary and length of
 service.
 
 155
 
 
 (2) The pension payable to any person shall be exempt
 from tax and shall be subject to periodic review to take account
 of changes in the value of money.
 (3) The payment of pension shall be prompt and regular
 and easily accessible to pensioners.
 Right of    255. Parliament may by law make provision for the right of
 citizens to
 demand    citizens to demand the holding by the Electoral Commission of a
 referenda,  referendum whether national or in any particular part of Uganda,
 on any issue.
 Manner of   256. Oaths specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution
 admini-
 stering   shall be administered in a manner prescribed by law.
 oaths.
 Interpre-   257. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
 tation.   requires-
 "Act of Parliament" means a law made by Parliament;
 "article" means an article of this Constitution;
 "child" means a person under the age of eighteen years;
 "court" means a court of judicature established by or
 under the authority of this Constitution;
 "Court of Appeal" means the Court of Appeal of
 Uganda;
 "district" means a district referred to in article 5 of this
 Constitution;
 "district council" means a district council established
 under article 180 of this Constitution;
 "education service" means any part of the public service
 established as the education service by Parliament by
 law in conformity with this Constituion;
 
 
 "financial year" means the period of twelve months
 ending on the thirtieth day of June in any year or
 such other day as Parliament may by law, prescribe;
 "functions" includes powers and duties;
 "Gazette" means the Uganda Gazette and includes any
 supplement of that Gazette;
 "Government" means the Government of Uganda;
 "health service" means any part of the public service
 established as the health service by Parliament by
 law in conformity with this Constitution;
 "High Court" means the High Court of Uganda;
 "judgement" includes a decision, an order or decree of
 the court;
 "judicial power" means the power to dispense justice
 among persons and between persons and the State
 under the laws of Uganda;
 "Leadership Code of Conduct" means the Leadership Code
 of Conduct established under Chapter Fourteen of
 this Constitution;
 "local government council" means a council referred to
 in article 180 of this Constitution;
 "Minister" means a Minister of the Government and
 includes a Minister of State and a Deputy Minister;
 "Oath of allegiance" means an oath of allegiance prescribed
 by this Constitution;
 "Parliament" means the Parliament of Uganda;
 "President" means the President of Uganda;
 157
 
 
 "public office" means an office in the public service;
 "public officer" means a person holding or acting in any
 public office;
 "public service" means service in a civil capacity of the
 Government or of a local government;
 "session" means a series of meetings of Parliament within a
 period of twelve months;
 "sitting" includes a period during which Parliament is
 continuously sitting without adjournment and a
 period during which it is in Committee;
 "Speaker" means the Speaker of Parliament and
 "Deputy Speaker" shall be construed accordingly;
 "subordinate court" means a court surbordinate to the
 High Court;
 "Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of Uganda;
 "Uganda" means the Republic of Uganda.
 (2) In this Constitution-
 (a) unless the context otherwise requires, a reference to
 an office in the public service includes-
 (i) a reference to the office of Chief Justice, Deputy
 Chief Justice, Principal Judge, a Justice of the
 Supreme Court or of a Justice of Appeal, or a
 Judge of the High Court and the office of a
 member of any other court of law established
 by or under the authority of this Constitution,
 other than a court-martial, being an office the
 
 
 emoluments of which are paid directly from
 the Consolidated Fund or directly out of moneys
 provided by Parliament; and
 (ii) a reference to the office of a member of the
 Uganda Police Force, the Uganda Prisons
 Service, the education service and the health
 service;
 (b) a reference to an office in the public service does not
 include a reference to the office of the President, the
 Vice-President, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, a
 Minister, the Attorney-General, a member of
 Parliament or a  member of any commission,
 authority, council or committee established by this
 Constitution.
 (3) In this Constitution unless the context otherwise
 requires, a reference to the holder of an office by the term designating
 that office includes a reference to any person for the time being
 lawfully acting in or performing the functions of that office.
 (4) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not
 be considered as holding a public office by reason only of the fact
 that that person is in receipt of a pension or similar allowance in
 respect of service under the Government.
 (5) The power to remove a public officer from office
 includes the power to require or permit that officer to retire from
 public service; except that nothing in this clause confers on any
 person or authority power to require the retirement of a person
 holding a public office for which the method of retirement or
 removal is specifically provided for by this Constitution.
 (6) Any provision in this Constitution that vests in any
 person or authority power to remove a public officer from office
 shall not prejudice the power of any person or authority to abolish
 159
 
 
 any office or any law providing for the compulsory retirement of
 public officers generally or any class of public officer on attaining
 an age specified in that law.
 (7) Where power is vested by this Constitution in any
 person or authority to appoint any person to act in or perform the
 functions of any office if the holder of the office is unable to
 perform those functions, no such appointment shall be called in
 question on the ground that the holder of the office was able to
 perform those functions.
 (8) Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to
 make any statutory instrument or rule, or pass any resolution, or give
 any direction, the power shall be construed as including the power,
 exercisable in like manner to amend or revoke any such statutory
 instrument, rule, resolution or direction.
 (9) In this Constitution, references to the amendment of
 any of the provisions of this Constitution or any Act of Parliament
 include references to the alteration, modification or re-enactment,
 with or without amendment or modification of that provision,
 the suspension or repeal of that provision and the making of a
 different provision in place of that provision.
 (10) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
 requires-
 (a) words referring to natural persons include a reference
 to corporations,
 (b) words in the singular include the plural, and
 words in the plural include the singular;
 (c) words directing or empowering a public officer to do
 any act or thing, or otherwise applying to that
 officer by the designation of the office of that
 person, include the successors in office and all
 deputies and other assistants of that person.
 
 
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
 
 AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
 258. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Amendment
 of
 Parliament may amend by way of addition, variation or repeal,  onsfon.
 any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the
 procedure laid down in this Chapter.
 (2) This Constitution shall not be amended except by an
 Act of Parliament-
 (a) the sole purpose of which is to amend this Constitution;
 and
 (b) the Act has been passed in accordance with this Chapter.
 259. (1) A bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend Amend-
 men
 any of the provisions specified in clause (2) of this article shall requiring
 not be taken as passed unless-                           referendum.
 (a) it is supported at the second and third readings in
 Parliament by not less than two-thirds of all members
 of Parliament; and
 (b) it has been referred to a decision of the people and
 approved by them in a referendum.
 (2) The provisions referred to in clause (1) of this article are-
 (a) this article;
 (b) Chapter One-articles I and 2;
 (c) Chapter Four-article 44;
 (d) Chapter Five-articles 69, 74 and 75;
 (e) Chapter Six-article 79 clause (2);
 (f) Chapter Seven-article 105 clause (1);
 (g) Chapter Eight-article 128 clause (1); and
 (h) Chapter Sixteen.
 
 
 Amend-      260. (1) A bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any of
 ments
 requiring  the provisions specified in clause (2) of this article shall not be
 appoval by  taken as passed unless-
 District
 Councils.
 (a) it is supported at the second and third readings in
 Parliament by not less than two-thirds of all members
 of Parliament; and
 (b) it has been ratified by at least two-thirds of the members
 of the district council in each of at least two-thirds
 of all the districts of Uganda.
 (2) The provisions referred to in clause (1) of this article are-
 (a) this article;
 (b) Chapter Two-article 5, clause (2);
 (c) Chapter Nine-article 152;
 (d) Chapter Eleven- article 176, clause (1) and articles
 178, 189 and 197.
 Amend-      261. A bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of
 ments by
 Parliament. the Constitution, other than those referred to in articles 259 and
 260 of this Constitution, shall not be taken as passed unless it is
 supported at the second and third readings by the votes of not
 less than two-thirds of all members of Parliament.
 Certificate  262. (1) The votes on the second and third readings referred to
 of compli-  in articles 259 and 260 of this Constitution shall be separated by
 anice.
 at least fourteen sitting days of Parliament.
 (2) A bill for the amendment of this Constitution which has
 been passed in accordance with this Chapter shall be assented to
 by the President only if-
 (a) it is accompanied by a certificat5 of the Speaker that the
 provisions of this Chapter have been complied with
 in relation to it; and
 
 
 (b) in the case of a bill to amend a provision to which
 article 259 or 260 of this Constitution applies, it is
 accompanied by a certificate of the Electoral
 Commission that the amendment has been
 approved at a referendum or, as the case may be,
 ratified by the district councils in accordance with
 this Chapter.
 (3) Where the provisions of clause (2) of this article are
 complied with in the case of a bill to which article 259 or 260 of this
 Constitution applies, the President shall not refuse to assent to the
 bill.
 (4) Where in the case of a bill to which clause (3) of this
 article applies the President--
 (a) refuses to assent to the bill; or
 (b) fails to assent to the bill within thirty days after the bill
 is submitted, the President shall be taken to have
 assented to the bill and the Speaker shall cause a
 copy of the bill to be laid before Parliament and the
 bill shall become law without the assent of the
 President.
 
 
 CHAPTER NINETEEN
 
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Transitional  263. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the
 Govern-   Government of the National Resistance Movement existing
 ment.
 immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, in
 this Chapter referred to as "the NRM Government" shall-
 (a) continue in office until a new government is elected in
 accordance with this Constitution;
 (b) as far as possible, exercise its functions in such a
 manner and with such modifications as are necessary
 to bring them into conformity with the provisions of
 this Constitution.
 (2) The elections provided for in clause (1) of this article
 shall be held within nine months after the promulgation of this
 Constitution.
 Particular   264. The appropriate organs of the NRM Government shall
 functions
 of       take such measures that are necessary or practical to give effect
 Transitional to the provisions of this Constitution and in particular, but without
 Govern-
 ment.     prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, shall-
 (a) by law establish an Interim Electoral Commission
 whose composition, appointment and functions shall,
 as far as possible, conform to the provisions of articles
 60 and 61 of this Constitution;
 (b) make interii laws for elections and other matters
 connected with elections to any office under this
 Constitution;
 (c) ensure that the tribunal for determination of disputes
 in respect of demarcation of electoral areas is
 appointed;
 
 
 (d) make laws for the expeditious disposal of appeals
 referred to in article 64 of this Constitution;
 (e) ensure that adequate resources and facilities are provided
 to the Interim Electoral Commission in accordance
 with article 66 of this Constitution.
 265. The Supreme Court and the High Court in existence Existing
 Courts of
 immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution Judicature.
 shall be taken to have been established under this Constitution
 and shall perform the functions of the Supreme Court and the
 High Court as specified in Chapter Eight of this Constitution.
 266. (1) A Justice of the Supreme Court or a Judge of the High Existing
 Court holding office immediately before the coming into force of offices of
 Judges.
 this Constitution shall continue to hold office as if appointed to
 that office under this Constitution.
 (2) Any person to whom this article applies shall, on the
 coming into force of this Constitution, be deemed to have taken
 and subscribed the oath of allegiance and the judicial oath as pre-
 scribed by this Constitution or any other law.
 267. Upon the coming into force of this Constitution and until Interim
 membership
 Justices of the Court of Appeal are appointed under article 134  of Court of
 of this Constitution, the Chief Justice shall, in consultation with  Appeal.
 the Principal Judge, from time to time, designate such number of
 Judges of the High Court as may be necessary to constitute the
 Court of Appeal.
 268. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, every person Existing
 who immediately before the coming into force of this offices.
 Constitution held or was acting in any office established by or by
 virtue of the Constitution then in force, so far as is consistent
 with the provisions of this Constitution, shall be taken to have
 been appointed as from the coming into force of this
 Constitution, to hold or to act in the equivalent office under this
 Constitution.
 
 
 (2) The provisions of this article shall not prejudice any
 powers conferred by or under this Constitution or any other law
 on any person or authority to make provision for the abolition of
 office, or for the removal from office of persons holding or acting
 in any office and for requiring persons to retire from office.
 (3) In determining, for the purpose of any law relating to
 retirement benefits or otherwise, the length of service of a
 public officer to whom clause (I ) of this article applies, service
 as a public officer under the Government in existence imme-
 diately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall
 be deemed to be continuous with service as a public officer
 which begins immediately after the coming into force of this
 Constitution.
 (4) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the
 terms and conditions of service of a person to whom this article
 applies, shall not be less favourable than those applicable to that
 person immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution.
 (5) For the avoidance of doubt, it is declared that any
 office established before the coming into force of this
 Constitution which is inconsistent with any provision of this
 Constitution is, on the coming into force of this Constitution.
 abolished.
 Rcgulation  269. On the commencement of this Constitution and until
 of polxi Pical
 organisa-  Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political
 tions.   organisations in accordance with article 73 of this Constitution,
 political activities may continue except-
 (a) opening and operating branch offices:
 (b) holding delegates' conferences;
 (c) holding public rallies;
 166
 
 
 (d) sponsoring or offering a platform to or in any way
 campaigning for or against a candidate for any pub-
 lic elections;
 (e) carrying on any activities that may interfere with the
 movement political system for the time being in
 force.
 270. Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (2) of article 72  Existing
 political
 of this Constitution, but subject to article 269 of this Constitution, parties, or
 the political parties or organisations in existence immediately before organisa-
 the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue to exist
 and operate in conformity with the provisions of this
 Constitution until Parliament makes laws relating to registration
 of political parties and organisations.
 271. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of article 69 of this First elec-
 Constitution, the first presidential, parliamentary, local govern-
 ment and other public elections after the promulgation of this
 Constitution shall be held under the movement political system.
 (2) Two years before the expiry of the term of the first
 Parliament elected under this Constitution, any person shall be
 free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or
 her choice for purposes of a referendum.
 (3) During the last month of the fourth year of the term of
 Parliament referred to in clause (2) of this article, a referendum shall
 be held to determine the political system the people of Uganda
 wish to adopt.
 (4) Parliament shall enact laws to give effect to the provisions
 of this article.
 272. The first appointments to the following offices shall be  Appoint-
 ment to cer-
 made within six months after the assumption of office of the tam offices.
 first President elected in accordance with the provisions of this
 Constitution-
 
 
 (a) the Chairperson and other members of the Uganda
 Human Rights Commission;
 (b) the Chairperson and other members of the Electoral
 Commission;
 (c) the Inspector-General of Government and the Deputy
 Inspectors-General; and
 (d) the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other members
 of the Judicial Service Commission.
 Existing    273. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the operation
 law.      of the existing law after the coming into force   of this
 Constitution shall not be affected by the coming into force of this
 Constitution but the existing law shall be construed with such
 modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may
 be necessary to bring it into conformity with this Constitution.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, the expression "existing
 law" means the written and unwritten law of Uganda or any part of
 it as existed immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution, including any Act of Parliament or Statute or statutory
 instrument enacted or made before that date which is to come into
 force on or after that date.
 Modifi-     274. The first President elected under this Constitution may,
 cation of
 existing  within twelve months after assuming office as President, by
 law by first  statutory instrument, make such provision as may appear nec-
 President.
 essary for repealing, modifying, adding to or adapting any law for
 bringing it into conformity with this Constitution or otherwise for
 giving effect to this Constitution.
 Enactments  275. Where immediately before the coming into force of this
 not yet in
 force.    Constitution any existing law had not been brought into force or
 was to come into force on a date subsequent to the coming into
 force of this Constitution, that law may be brought into force in
 accordance with its terms or shall come into force on such subse-
 quent date as the case may be.
 
 
 276. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the urban  Provisions
 regarding
 authorities in existence at the coming into force of this urban
 Constitution other than the Kampala City Council, shall constitute authorities.
 lower local government units under the district councils within
 whose district they fall.
 (2) Subject to the powers of Parliament, the laws applicable
 to urban authorities immediately before the commencement of
 this Constitution, shall apply with such modifications as may
 be necessary to give effect to the provisions of Chapter Eleven of
 this Constitution.
 277. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution to the Existing
 commi-
 contrary, any commission or committee of inquiry in existence ssions and
 immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, committees
 of inquiry.
 may continue in existence until the submission of its report unless
 otherwise dissolved in accordance with the law.
 278. Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution, any Oaths
 deemed to
 person who immediately before the coming into force of this have been
 Constitution held or was acting in any office established under taken-
 or by virtue of the Constitution then in force and who holds or
 is acting in an equivalent office under this Constitution, shall be
 deemed to have taken and subscribed any necessary oath under
 this Constitution, in accordance with this Constitution.
 279. (1) Where any matter or thing has been commenced   Pending
 matters.
 before the coming into force of this Constitution by any person or
 authority having power to do so under the existing law, that matter
 or thing may be carried on and completed by the person or
 authority having power to do so on or after the coming into force
 of this Constitution and, unless the President in any case otherwise
 directs, it shall not be necessary for that person or authority to
 commence that matter or thing afresh.
 (2) This article shall have effect subject to the provisions
 of this Constitution and to any law made by Parliament.
 
 
 Proceedings  280. Legal proceedings pending immediately before the coming
 pending
 before    into force of this Constitution before any court, including civil
 courts.   proceedings against the Government, may be proceeded with
 and completed.
 Prerogative  281. The prerogative of mercy of the President under article
 of mercy.  121 of this Constitution may be exercised in respect of any criminal
 re cases
 before    offences committed before the coming into force of this
 Constitu-
 tion.     Constitution as it may in respect of a criminal offence committed
 after the coming into force of this Constitution,
 Devolution  282. Subject to the provisions of article 283 of this Constitution-
 of rights
 and liabili-
 ties.            (a) any right, prerogative, privilege or function which under
 the existing law vested in the President shall vest in
 the President or other person or authority as is specified
 under this Constitution;
 (b) any right, privilege, obligation, liability, or function
 vested in or subsisting against the Government by
 or under an existing law shall continue to so vest or
 subsist.
 Succession  283. (1) All property, whether movable or immovable, and all
 to property,  assets which immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution were vested in any authority or person for the purposes
 of or in right of the Government or in the Government shall, on
 the coming into force of this Constitution, vest in the
 Government, subject to the provisions of Chapter Fifteen of this
 Constitution.
 (2) Any property which was immediately before the coming
 into force of this Constitution liable to escheat or to be forfeited
 to any person or authority in right of the Government shall, on
 the coming into force of this Constitution be liable to escheat or
 to be forfeited to the Government.
 
 
 284. Where there is subsisting, immediately before the coming Succession
 to con~tracts.
 into force of this Constitution, a contract which has been entered
 into by or on behalf of the Government, then on and after the
 coming into force of this Constitution, all rights, liabilities and
 obligations of the Government under the contract shall be vested
 in or, as the case may be, subsist against the Government; and the
 contract shall otherwise continue to be of full force and effect.
 285. Upon the coming into force of this Constitution and sub- Revocation
 of statutory
 ject to the provisions of paragraph (a) of clause (2) of article 237 leases to
 of this Constitution, statutory leases to urban authorities shall utort
 cease to exist.
 286. Where-                                             Inter-
 national
 agreements,
 (a) any treaty, agreement or convention with any country treaties and
 conventions.
 or international organisation was made or affirmed
 by Uganda or the Government on or after the ninth
 day of October, 1962, and was still in force imme-
 diately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution; or
 (b) Uganda or the Government was otherwise a party
 immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution to any such treaty, agreement or
 convention,
 the treaty, agreement or convention shall not be affected by the
 coming into force of this Constitution; and Uganda or the
 Government, as the case may be, shall continue to be a party to it.
 287. (1) Subject to articles 263 and 264 of this Constitution, Repeal of
 the Constitution of Uganda of 1967 and Legal Notice No. 1 of 1967
 Constitution
 1986 as amended, shall, upon the coming into force of this and Legal
 Notice No.
 Constitution, stand repealed.                              I of 1986.
 
 
 (2) For the avoidance of doubt, the enactments repealed
 by clause (1) of this article, shall, notwithstanding the repeal,
 continue in force for the purposes only of the exercise by the
 NRM Government of its functions under articles 263 and 264 of
 this Constitution.
 SCHEDULES
 FIRST SCHEDULE
 Article 5, 178
 DISTRICTS OF UGANDA
 1. Arua
 2. Bundibugyo
 3. Kabale
 4. Kampala
 5. Kasese
 6. Kibale
 7. Kisoro
 8. Kotido
 9. Kumi
 10. Mbale
 11. Moroto
 12. Nebbi
 13.  Pallisa
 14. Rukungiri
 15.  Soroti
 16. Tororo
 17. Kabarole of Toro
 
 
 18. Kapchorwa of Sebei
 19. Moyo of Madi
 20. Gulu      of Acholi
 21.  Kitgum  f
 22. Apac    o
 23. Lira   of Lango
 24. Iganga
 25. Jinja   of Busoga
 26.  KamuliJ
 27. Hoima
 28. Masindi of Bunyoro
 29. Kalangala
 30.  Kiboga
 31. Masaka
 32. Mpigi       of Buganda
 33. Mubende
 34. Mukono
 35. Luwero
 36. Rakai
 37. Bushenyi
 38. Mbarara    of Ankole
 39. Ntungamo I
 
 
 SECOND SCHEDULE
 
 Article 5
 THE BOUNDARY OF UGANDA.
 Commencing at the highest point of Mt. Sabyinyo; thence in a
 north-easterly direction to the southern extremity of the Bunagana
 ridge marked by Boundary Pillar 1; thence along the watershed of
 Bunagana to its highest point, marked by BP 2; thence in a north- west-
 erly direction in a straight line to the summit of the knoll Chieshire,
 marked by BP 3; thence in a straight line in a north- easterly direc-
 tion to the confluence of the Rivers Nyarugando and Nkaka (Kanga);
 thence following the thalweg of the River Nyarugando to its source;
 thence in a straight line in a north- westerly direction to the highest
 point of the hill Giseke, marked by BP 4; thence following the water-
 shed between the hill Giseke, and the hill Lubona and its continuation
 as far as a point, marked by BP 5, about 400 metres north-west of the
 summit of the hill Lubona; thence along the crest of the spur running in
 a north-westerly direction to River Sinda (Lulangala); thence along the
 crest of the opposite spur, as shown on the map, to the summit of the
 hill Kirambo, marked by BP 6; thence in a curved line, as shown on
 the map, along the crest of a spur running from Kirambo in a north-
 easterly and northerly direction to the northernmost elbow of the River
 Kaku or Rutshuru; thence in a straight line across this river to the
 mouth of the stream Kasumo (Sumo); thence along the thalweg of this
 stream to its source; thence in a straight line to the lowest point,
 marked by BP 7 of the col north-east of the above-mentioned elbow of
 the River Kaku or Rutshuru; thence in a straight line to the confluence
 of the Rivers Kyarakibi and Murungu; thence following the thalweg of
 the River Murungu down-stream to its junction with the thalweg of the
 River Chonga; thence in a straight line to the summit of a hill(Muko),
 marked by BP 8, about 700 metres north-north-east of this junction;
 thence in a straight line in a northerly direction to the summit of the
 
 
 hill Chikomo (Deko South) or Katwakare, marked by BP 9; thence in
 a straight line to the summit of the hill Deko North; thence in a straight
 line to the summit of a hill (Nteko) about 3 km north by west of Deko
 North; thence in a straight line to the point, marked by BP 10, where the
 Kayonsa road crosses the River Ivi; thence in a straight line to a point
 marked by BP 11, about 1 km to the north of BP 10, on a prominent
 spur of the Nkabwa-Salambo range; thence following the crest of this
 spur to the summit of the hill Salambo; thence along the watershed of
 the Nkabwa-Salambo range to the summit of the hill Nkabwa, marked
 by BP 12.
 From the summit of Nkabwa hill, the boundary runs in an easter-
 ly direction to the summit of the hill Kyeshero, marked by BP 12A;
 thence in the same straight line to the point known as Kakoraza,
 marked by BP 13; thence in the same straight line eastwards to the
 River Munyaga; thence along the thalweg of this river, downstream, to
 its junction with the thalweg of the River Ishasha; thence along the
 thalweg of the River Ishasha, downstream, to its mouth in Lake
 Edward; thence in a straight line in a northerly direction across Lake
 Edward to a point marked by BP 1 at the mouth of the River Lubiriha-
 Thako; thence along the thalweg of this river to a point marked by BP
 2; thence along the thalweg of this river to a point marked by BP 3;
 thence along the thalweg of this river to a point marked by BP 4;
 thence along the thalweg of this river to the point where it separates
 into the rivers Lubiriha and Thako as marked by BP 5; thence along
 the thalweg of the River Thako to a point marked by BP 6; thence con-
 tinuing along the thalweg of the River Thako, upstream, to its source
 at a point marked by BP 7; thence in a straight line to the highest point
 of the Rwenzori Range, the summit of Margharita Peak; thence in a
 straight line to the source of the River Lami, situated about 5.4 km
 north-west of the Peak Kalengire and about 20 km south-west of the
 hill-top Karangura; thence along the thalweg of the River Lami, down-
 stream, to its junction with the thalweg of River Semliki; thence along
 
 
 the thalweg of the River Semliki, downstream, to its mouth in Lake
 Albert; thence across Lake Albert in a succession of straight lines pass-
 ing through the points situated mid-way between the shores of the lake
 on parallels of 010 31', 010 45' and 020 00' north latitude, to a point
 mid-way between the shores of the lake on the parallel of 020 07' north
 latitude.
 From this point the boundary runs in a northerly direction
 along the meridian for a distance of approximately 4.5 km north of the
 point on the parallel of 020 07' north latitude; thence in a straight line
 to a point marked by BP I on the shore of Lake Albert and on the pro-
 longation of a straight line from the hill Kagudi (Uduka) to the knoll
 Marombe on the escarpment overlooking Lake Albert about 1.7 km
 south-east by east of the hill Kagudi, and is about 100 metres from the
 lakeshore on the said straight line; thence in a straight line to BP 2 on
 the hill Marombe, about 2 km from the lakeshore; thence in a straight
 line to BP 3, on the summit of the hill Kagudi (Uduka); thence in a
 straight line to BP 4 on the neck of the hill Ngumuda Biet (Otal), which
 is about 1.04 km from the hill Kagudi; thence in a straight line to BP
 5 on the hill Biet (Otal), at a distance of 3.04 km from the hill Kagudi;
 thence in a straight line to BP 6 on the hill Virkidi on a straight line
 from the hill Kagudi to the hill Biet at a distance of about 4.8 km from
 Kagudi; thence in a straight line to BP 7 at the intersection of a straight
 line from the hill Kagudi to the hill Biet and a straight line from the hill
 Milia to the junction of the Rivers Nashiodo and Alala, close to the
 River Otal on its left bank and is known as Utal; thence in a northerly
 direction along the meridian of BP 7 on a straight line from the hill
 Milia to the junction of the Rivers Nashiodo and Alala to BP 8 about
 4 km from the junction of the said rivers on the hill Wellingondo;
 thence along the meridian to BP 9 on the hill Nyatabu (Niatabu), about
 2.48 km from the junction of the said rivers; thence along the meridi-
 an to BP 10 on the hill Nyatabu II (Nitabu) about 1.2 km from the junc-
 tion of the said rivers in one of the villages known as Parombo; thence
 176
 
 
 along the meridian to BP I I on the right bank of the river Nashiodo
 (Achodo) at its junction with the River Alala; thence along the thalweg
 of the river upstream to its source to BP 12 on the summit of the hill
 Keresi; thence along a curved line following the watershed of the river
 Sido basin to BP 13 on the summit of the hill Aminzi; thence in a
 straight line to BP 14 on the summit of the hill Kiti in a straight line
 from the hill Aminzi to Monda (Omunda) Rock at a distance of about
 2 km from Aminzi; thence in a straight line to BP 15 on the east imme-
 diately below the summit of the rock Monda; thence in a straight line
 to BP 16 on the right bank of the River Niabola (Nyibola) about 15 feet
 above its junction with the rivers Nyarwodo (Narodo) and Niabola
 (Nyibola); thence along the thalweg of the river Niabola (Nyibola) to
 BP 17 upon the summit of the hill Agu; thence along a curved line fol-
 lowing the watershed of the river Aioda (Ayuda) basin on BP 18 on the
 summit of the hill Asina about 3.44 km south-west by south from the
 hill Agu; thence along the watershed to BP 19 on the summit of the hill
 Sisi; thence along the curved line following the watershed of the river
 Leda to BP 20 on the summit of the hill Ajigu; at a distance of about
 2.56 km north-west by west of the hill Sisi; thence along a curved line
 following the watershed of the river Leda basin to BP 21, at a point
 2.16 km west of BP 20; thence along a curved line following the water-
 shed to BP 22 on the knoll Okiyo situated about 4.2 km south-east by
 east of the summit of the hill Cho; thence along a curved line to BP 23
 on a small group of rocks (Matijo) upon the watershed between the
 river Niagak basin and that tributary which joins the Niagak just below
 the confluence of the rivers Niagaka and Amoda and is about 2 km
 south-east by east of the hill Cho; thence along a curved line to BP 24
 on a small knoll on the above described watershed at a distance of
 about 200 metres from the confluence of the rivers Niagak and Amoda;
 thence in a straight line to BP 25 on the right bank of the river Amoda
 (Ammodar), immediately above its confluence with the river
 Nyalidha, at a point about 1,600 metres south west of the summit of
 the hill Akar; thence along the thaweg of the river Nyalidha to BP 26
 
 
 upon the Nile-Congo watershed about 6.2 km west-south-west of the
 summit of the hill Akar and about 5.6 km south-south-east of the hill
 Utzi, close to the source of the river Omithamei.
 From this point the boundary follows the Nile-Congo water-
 shed in a northerly direction to a point about 0.3 km south of the source
 of the river Kaia (Kaya) the tri-junction of the Uganda/Zaire/Sudan
 International Boundaries; thence in a straight line to the source of the
 river Kaia (Kaya); thence along the thalweg of the river Kaia (Kaya),
 downstream to its confluence with the unnamed river which runs
 immediately south of Chei and Lodwa rocks, and then runs in a
 northerly direction; thence in an easterly direction in a straight line to
 a point on the western summit of the hill Kirwa, marked by a surface
 beacon; thence in a south-easterly direction in a straight line to the
 confluence of the rivers Adjika and Khor Nyaura (Nyawa); thence in
 a north- easterly direction in a straight line to a point on the top of J.
 Jalei, marked by a surface beacon; thence in an easterly direction to the
 source of the river Khor Kayo (Kayu), approximately 3/4 miles from
 J. Jalei; thence following the thalweg of the Khor Kayo to a point on
 the thalweg directly opposite the westernmost point of the foothills of
 the escarpment running north-west from Jebel Elengua; thence in a
 straight line to the westernmost point of the foothills; thence follow-
 ing the bottom of the foothills of this escarpment in a south-easterly, or
 such a line as shall exclude the riverain people below Nirmle; thence
 following due east to the intersection of the thalweg of the river Bahr
 el Jebel (White Nile) with the thalweg of the river Unyama; thence
 along the thalweg of the river Unyuama, upstream, to a point on the
 thalweg along the latitude of Jebel Ebijo; thence following due east to
 the summit of Jebel Ebijo; thence following in the direction of Jebel
 Kakomera to the thalweg of the river Achwa; thence following the
 thalweg of the river Achwa, downstream, to the intersection of the
 thalweg and a straight line towards the village Lokai to the northern-
 most point of the bottom of Jebel Marokho; thence following the sum-
 
 
 mit of Jebel Agu; thence following the summit of Jebel Ilala
 (Lwomwaka); thence in a straight line in a north-easterly direction to
 the hill (Jebel) Modole; thence following a straight line in a south-
 easterly direction to the most south-easterly foothills of Jebel
 Terenteinia; thence in a straight line in a south-easterly direction to a
 point on the summit of the hill (Jebel) Lonyili marked by a triangulation
 mark 9.Y.2; thence on bearing 44* 45' and for a distance of 58,506 feet
 approximately to triangulation mark 9.Y.9; thence on bearing 44* 45'
 and for a distance of 17,831 feet approximately to a triangulation mark
 9.Y.8; thence on bearing 44* 45' and for a distance of 26,945 feet to a
 triangulation mark 9.Y.6; thence on bearing 44* 45' and for a distance
 of 17,854 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.5; thence on bearing 44* 45'
 and for a distance of 7,320 feet to a triangulation mark 9.Y.4; thence
 on bearing 44* 45' for a distance of 6,420 feet to a triangulation mark
 9.Y.3; thence on bearing 44* 45' and for a distance of 20,306 feet to a
 triangulation mark 9.Y.I on the summit of the hill (Jebel) Urungo;
 thence on bearing 44' 45' to a point north of Mount Zulia at a distance
 of 31.5 miles approximately from 9.Y. I and which is to the tri-junction
 of the Uganda/Sudan/Kenya International Boundaries.
 From this point the boundary is defined by a series of
 Boundary Pillars joined by straight lines as follows; on an approximate
 bearing of 127' for an approximate distance of 21,500 ft. to Pillar UK
 180; thence on a bearing of 1320 41' for a distance of 4,444ft. to Pillar
 UK 179;
 151" 51'      14,674 ft.   UK178.
 217' 00       9,935 ft.    UK177.
 153' 39'      11,091 ft.   UK176.
 116' 35'      6,799 ft.    UK175.
 153* 08'      9,457 ft.    UK174.
 180' 05'      5,313ft.     UK173;
 193' 47'      3,942ft.     UK172;
 252* 36'      11,338ft.    UK171;
 
 179
 
 
 1750 13'
 1080 18'
 136" 07'
 1180 30'
 184 26'
 193 32'
 1950 43'
 208* 42'
 2250 39'
 244* 44'
 244* 37'
 186 44'
 1850 09'
 141 19'
 1050 28'
 62* 15'
 79* 18'
 79* 24'
 98* 30'
 86* 30'
 190 35'
 540 05'
 520 46'
 84* 15'
 88* 38'
 93* 11'
 162 13'
 169" 22'
 180" 05'
 276* 03'
 269* 35'1
 220* 56'
 
 6,533ft.
 7,280ft.
 12,882ft.
 12,368ft.
 1,847ft.
 8,426ft.
 12,045ft.
 606ft.
 1,958ft.
 4,290ft.
 5,256ft.
 7,960ft.
 797ft.
 224ft.
 1,390ft.
 6,590ft.
 6,628ft.
 562ft.
 7,857ft.
 6,719ft.
 2,151ft.
 1,326ft.
 1,387ft.
 7,907ft.
 2,969ft.
 3,880ft.
 10,907ft.
 1,233ft.
 6,988ft.
 4,216ft.
 2,526ft.
 4,826ft.
 
 UK170;
 UK169;
 UK168;
 UK167;
 UK166;
 UK165;
 UK164;
 UK163;
 UK162;
 UK161;
 UK160;
 UK159;
 UK158;
 UK157;
 UK156;
 UK155;
 UK154;
 UK153;
 UK152;
 UK151;
 UK150;
 UK149;
 UK148;
 UK147;
 UK146;
 UK145;
 UK144;
 UK143;
 UK142;
 UK141;
 UK140;
 UK139;
 
 180
 
 
 2130 23'
 244* 58'
 262* 40'
 1760 51'
 710 53'
 1410 01'
 73* 20'
 95* 51'
 1070 02'
 1930 16'
 1640 54'
 2490 32'
 248* 20'
 257* 52'
 1310 49'
 72* 43'
 810 33'
 69* 56'
 68* 27'
 68* 08'
 1080 26'
 120 39'
 174* 30'
 1770 54'
 73* 00'
 29* 30'
 79* 44'
 66* 16'
 79* 55'
 1450 27'
 156" 21'
 1350 26'
 1250 22'
 
 4,857ft.
 2,355ft.
 1,631ft.
 2,685ft.
 2,157ft.
 1,898ft.
 2,900ft.
 1,882ft.
 5,231 ft.
 1,233ft.
 3,325ft.
 2,213ft.
 5,751ft.
 1,900ft.
 3,476ft.
 4,611 ft.
 1,335ft.
 6,268ft.
 4,067ft.
 2,676ft.
 1,514ft.
 591ft.
 1,137ft.
 1,945ft.
 766ft.
 2,694ft.
 907ft.
 1,937ft.
 2,194ft.
 8,509ft.
 6,769ft.
 8,205ft.
 6,438ft.
 
 UK138;
 UK137;
 UK 136;
 UK135;
 UK134;
 UK 133;
 UK 132;
 UK 13 1;
 UKI30;
 UK129;
 UK 128;
 UK 127;
 UK126;
 UK125;
 UK124;
 UK123;
 UK122;
 UK121;
 UKI20;
 UKII9;
 UKI18;
 UKI7;
 UKI16;
 UKll5;
 UK-I4;
 UK 113;
 UKII2;
 UKIll;
 UKIIO;
 UK109;
 UK108;
 UK107;
 UK106;
 
 
 1290 06'
 1870 04'
 190* 48'
 206* 19'
 90* 43'
 19" 19'
 43* 44'
 72* 50'
 77* 44'
 910 40'
 1190 12'
 137* 48'
 138* 59'
 1660 14'
 2080 52'
 109* 54'
 130* 36'
 189 05'
 190 53'
 1730 59'
 1850 18'
 1850 17'
 1850 17'
 214 56'
 223* 42'
 234* 33'
 264* 01'
 305* 56'
 254' 05'
 166* 43'
 135" 44'
 1470 08'
 1710 4Y
 
 5,399ft.
 4,979ft.
 3,490ft.
 1,348ft.
 989ft.
 13,434ft.
 3,513ft.
 4,525ft.
 6,713ft.
 5,820ft.
 3,050ft.
 9,847ft.
 2,497ft.
 4,695ft.
 5,792ft.
 13,971 ft.
 3,998ft.
 1 1,61Oft.
 9,774ft.
 11,720ft.
 3,718ft.
 8,946ft.
 9,408ft.
 3,320ft.
 6,391ft.
 4,606ft.
 9,781ft.
 2,607ft.
 658ft.
 3,498ft.
 7,662ft.
 7,41 Oft.
 6,334ft.
 
 UK105;
 UK 104;
 UK 103;
 UK 102;
 UK101;
 UKI100;
 UK99;
 UK98;
 UK97;
 UK96;
 UK95;
 UK94;
 UK93;
 UK92;
 UK91;
 UK90;
 UK89;
 UK88;
 UK87;
 UK86;
 UK85;
 UK84;
 UK83;
 UK82;
 UK8 1;
 UK80;
 UK79;
 UK78B;
 UK78A;
 UK78;
 UK77;
 UK76;
 UK75;
 
 182
 
 
 212" 11'
 249* 27'
 1810 55'
 170 05'
 1290 00'
 1370 01'
 1650 27'
 1590 01'
 1740 59'
 1790 35'
 1720 44'
 1780 53'
 1480 52'
 98* 07'
 1240 01'
 1220 27'
 1470 13'
 1570 07'
 66* 06'
 1070 46'
 1170 32'
 1510 38'
 1310 09'
 1710 33'
 1850 03'
 1810 55'
 1770 35'
 156" 20'
 142" 05'
 175" 3T
 170" 00
 112 40'
 119" 36'
 
 6,726ft.
 3,158ft.
 13,506ft.
 2,587ft.
 5,641ft.
 8,709ft.
 13,939ft.
 9,269ft.
 14,818ft.
 5,101 ft.
 9,833ft.
 6,324ft.
 3,609ft.
 3,818ft.
 5,022ft.
 284ft.
 4,281ft.
 5,115ft.
 6,71 Oft.
 9,418ft.
 4,055ft.
 10,044ft.
 6,896ft.
 7,589ft.
 3,500ft.
 6,136ft.
 11, 141ft.
 4,169ft.
 3,944ft.
 7,091ft.
 21,063ft.
 13,232ft.
 3,082ft.
 
 UK74;
 UK73;
 UK72;
 UK7 1;
 UK70;
 UK69;
 UK68;
 UK67;
 UK66;
 UK65;
 UK64;
 UK63;
 UK62;
 UK61;
 UK60;
 UK59;
 UK58;
 UK57;
 UK56;
 UK55;
 UK54;
 UK53;
 UK52;
 UK51;
 UK50;
 UK49;
 UK48;
 UK47;
 UK46;
 UK45;
 UK44;
 UK43;
 UK42;
 
 
 160 39'
 1050 33'
 87* 07'
 980 58'
 320 32'
 1200 25'
 1570 06'
 1130 29'
 1060 38'
 1090 05'
 1190 28'
 1540 27'
 1560 57'
 74' 05'
 1400 39'
 159 12'
 1590 02'
 1620 28'
 1640 56'
 1730 19'
 1810 26'
 1910 10'
 1900 36'
 1330 27'
 1610 49'
 1620 32'
 1360 59'
 1570 19'
 1450 56'
 1280 23'
 79* 21'
 6* 50'
 750 11'
 
 14,972ft.
 5,819ft.
 6,099ft.
 2,741 ft.
 6,258ft.
 2,826ft.
 3,252ft.
 3,665ft.
 2,097ft.
 1,927ft.
 2,032ft.
 4,336ft.
 7,396ft.
 4,234ft.
 3,143ft.
 1,522ft.
 1,137ft.
 6,582ft.
 11,085ft.
 6,900ft.
 2,542ft.
 3,580ft.
 12,898ft.
 7,521ft.
 6,006ft.
 4,634ft.
 17,307ft.
 6,478ft.
 9,097ft.
 7,482ft.
 3,788ft.
 6,123ft.
 5,044ft.
 
 UK41;
 UK40;
 UK39;
 UK38;
 UK37;
 UK36;
 UK35;
 UK34;
 UK33;
 UK32;
 UK31;
 UK30;
 UK29;
 UK28;
 UK27;
 UK26;
 UK25;
 UK24;
 UK23;
 UK22;
 UK21;
 UK20;
 UK19;
 UK18;
 UK17;
 UK16;
 UK15;
 UK14;
 UK13;
 UK12;
 UKll;
 UK1O;
 UK9;
 
 
 1440 31'      2,289ft.     UK8;
 1690 05'      14,429ft.    UK7;
 1650 40'      12,000ft.    UK6;
 92 56'      7,352ft.     UK5;
 160 24'      1,785ft.     UK4;
 1670 20'      4,482ft.     UK3;
 158" 00'      10,395ft.    UK2;
 86* 07'      2,112ft.     UKI;
 situated on the east bank of the River Kanamuton at Map Reference
 YT 1773 (Sheet NA-36-8); thence following a straight line up the cen-
 tre to the top of the pass known as Karamuroi (Pokot) or Karithakol
 (Karamojong); thence southerly following a straight line to the hillock
 called Lokula; thence south-easterly following a straight line to a beacon
 at the highest point of the ridge known as Kariemakaris; thence con-
 tinuing following a straight line, still southerly, to the foot of the west-
 ern spur of the hill known as Aoruma, and following the foot of that
 spur to a beacon; thence in a generally southerly direction following
 straight lines to the westernmost end of the small hillock known as
 Lewi Lewi, to the hillock known as Sumemerr (known to the Pokot as
 Sumaremar) to the hillock Morumeri, to the hill known as Kauluk,
 across the Kanyangareng River to Nongalitaba Hill, across the Kunyao
 River to the small hillock known as Lokwamor, to the hillock known
 as Kokas, to Korkurao Hill; thence to Sagat Hill and along the high-
 est points of the rocky ridge (forming a continuation of Mount
 Riwa and known collectively by the Karamojong as Kogipie) known
 severally as Sagat (Karamojong) or Kogipie(Pokot), Moruebu and
 Karenyang; thence to the summit of the hill Muregogoi; thence fol-
 lowing a straight line to the source of the River Maragat; thence by the
 centre of the River Maragat to its confluence with the river Maron;
 thence south-westerly by the foot of the north-western slopes of
 Kassauria Hill to the western extremity of that hill; thence following/a
 straight line south-easterly to the north-eastern extremity of Mount Riwa;
 
 
 thence following the foot of the eastern portion of Mount Riwa to the
 source of the Kanyerus River (marked by a large tree); thence south-
 easterly following a line of cairns, approximately in a straight line to the
 confluence of the River Bukwa (Kibukwa) with the River Suam
 (Swam); thence following the thalweg of the River Suam, upstream, to
 the point where the more north-westerly of the two streams forming
 the River Suam (Swam) or Turkwell emerges from the crator of Mount
 Elgon; thence following a straight line south-westerly to the highest
 point of Mount Elgon (Sudek).
 From this point, the boundary continues following a straight
 line in a north-westerly direction to the Wagagai summit of Mount
 Elgon; thence following a straight line, south-westerly, to the source of
 the River Lwakhakha (also known as the Malaba); thence following
 the thalweg of the River Malaba to its intersection with the eastern side
 of the Majanji-Busia-Tororo road at Map Reference XR 2765 (Sheet
 NA-36-15); thence in a south-westerly direction following a line on
 the east side of and 100 feet distant from and parallel to the centre line
 of the said road to its intersection with the River Okame at Map
 Reference XR 2458 (Sheet NA-36-15); thence upstream following the
 thalweg of the River Okame to its confluence with the River Alupe;
 thence upstream following the thalweg of the River Alupe to a point at
 Map Reference XR 2453 (Sheet NA-36-15) marked by a boundary
 cairn; thence following successively in a south-westerly direction, a
 number of boundary cairns at distances from each other of 55o feet,
 1226 feet, 959 feet, 976 feet, 1007 feet, 580 feet, 1512 feet, 463 feet,
 2364 feet (on the northern side of the main Busia-Mumias road) and
 1436 feet at the source of the River Sango at Map Reference XR 2251
 (Sheet NA-36-15); thence downstream following the thalweg of the
 River Sango to its confluence with the River Sio; thence following the
 thalweg of the River Sio to its mouth in Lake Victoria.
 From this point, the boundary continues following a straight
 line south-westerly to the most northerly point of Sumba Island, thence
 186
 
 
 by the western and south-western shores of that island to its most
 southerly point; thence following a straight line south-easterly to the
 most westerly point of Mageta Island; thence following a straight line,
 still southerly, to the most western point of Kiringiti Island; thence fol-
 lowing a straight line southerly to the most westerly point of ilemba Island;
 thence following a straight line southerly to the westernmost point of
 Pyramid Island; thence following a straight line due south to a point on
 latitude 01000'S.
 From this point the boundary continues following the 01000'S
 parallel to the western shore of Lake Victoria; thence following the
 boundary pillars already erected along the 01000'S as far as the second
 crossing of this line by the River Kagera, between boundary pillars
 Nos. 27 and 26; thence following the thalweg of the River Kagera,
 upstream, to its confluence with the River Kakitumba; thence following the
 thalweg of the River Kakitumba, upstream, to its confluence with the
 River Chizinga; hence following the River Chizinga, upstream, to the
 source of its south-western branch marked by BP 38, and continuing along
 the thalweg in a south-westerly direction to BP 37 on the saddle
 between the hills Mavari and Kitoff; thence north-westerly in a straight
 line to a direction pillar on a knoll at the foot of the easterly spur of
 Kitoff; thence in a straight line along the easterly spur of Kitoff to a
 direction pillar; thence in a straight line to a direction pillar on the
 south-easterly spur of Kitoff; thence in a straight line to BP 36 on the
 prominent southerly spur of Kitoff; thence continuing around the
 slopes of the hill Kitoff marked by direction pillars to BP 35 and by
 direction pillars along the westerly spur of Kitoff and in a series of
 straight lines to BP 34; thence continuing to BPs 33 and 32 along the
 eastern slopes of the Mashuri range marked at each change of direction
 by a direction pillar as far as BP 31 on a conspicuous small hill; thence
 in a straight line in a south- easterly direction to another conspicuous
 small hill marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line across
 the River Muvumba to the southern summit of the hill Ndega (Mbega)
 
 
 marked by BP 30; thence in a straight line to a direction pillar in the
 valley between the hills Ndega and Kivisa; thence in a straight line to
 a direction pillar on the northern spur of the hill Kivisa; thence in
 along the spur of this hill to its summit marked by BP 29; thence con-
 tinuing along a very conspicuous water parting to the top of the hill
 Magumbizi marked by BP 28; thence along a line marked by direction
 pillars following the long easterly spur of the hill Nebishagara to its
 summit marked by BP 27; thence along the crest of the conspicuous
 westerly Spur to a direction pillar; thence in a straight line to a direc-
 tion pillar on a conspicuous knoll in the valley; thence along the crest
 of a spur leading south-west and south to the summit of the hill
 Kitanga marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line to the
 summit of the conspicuous small hill Nyakara marked by a direction
 pillar; thence in a straight line marked by a direction pillar in the val-
 ley to BP 26 on the northern crest of the hill Kabimbiri; thence along
 the crest in a southerly direction to the top of Kabimbiri marked by BP
 25; thence along the crest of this hill in a north-westerly direction,
 marked by direction pillars to BP 24; thence down the crest of a promi-
 nent spur to BP 23 at its foot, as more particularly delineated on
 Uganda 1/50,000 sheet 94/3 (Series Y 732). The boundary then cross-
 es the Kamuganguzi or Murinda swamp and follows the thalweg of the
 Kiruruma swamp to a direction pillar at the edge of that swamp and
 thence to BP 22 on a conspicuous knoll; thence in a west- south-west-
 erly direction marked by direction pillars along the spur of the hill
 Kisibo to its summit marked by BP 21; thence in a straight line to BP
 20 in the valley east of the hill Sanja; thence in a straight line to the top
 of the hill Sanja marked by BP 19; thence in a straight line to the top
 of the hill Akasiru marked by a direction pillar; thence in a straight line
 to BP 18 which is situated 4 km north-west of the summit of the hill
 Gwassa; thence in a straight line to the source of the River Kiruruma
 marked by BP 17; thence following the thalweg of the River Kiruruma
 (Bigaga) downstream to BP 16 at its confluence with the River Mugera
 (Narugwambu); thence in straight line due west marked by a direction
 
 
 pillar to BP 15; thence along the crest of the Vugamba range by direc-
 tion pillar to BP 14 on the hill Maberemere; thence by direction pillars
 to BP 13 on the most northerly point of the range; thence by direction
 pillars to the hill Kanyaminyenya marked by BP 12; thence continuing
 along the crest of the Vugamba range to its southern summit marked
 by BP 11; thence in a straight line to BP 10 on the top of the hill
 Lugendabare; thence in a straight line to BP 9 on the hill Namujera;
 thence in a curved line marked by BPs 8, 7, 6, 5 and 4 to the summit
 of the hill Musonga (East) marked by BP 3 as more particularly delin-
 eated on Uganda 1/50,000 sheet 93/4 (Series Y 732). The boundary
 continues along the crest of this hill in a south-westerly direction
 marked by a direction pillar to BP 2 situated between the hills
 Nyarubebsa and Musongo and on the track leading southwards; thence
 to the summit of the hill Nyarubebsa marked by a direction pillar;
 thence in a south- westerly direction along the spur referred to as the
 Mulemule- Musongo spur to the highest point of Muhabura; thence
 along the watershed from the highest point of Muhabura to the highest
 point of Mugahinga; thence in a westerly direction to BP 1 on the
 north- south track running between Mugahinga and Sabyinyo; thence
 along the watershed to the highest point of Mount Sabyinyo the point
 of commencement.
 THIRD SCHEDULE
 Article 10 (a)
 UGANDA'S INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES
 AS AT IST FEBRUARY, 1926
 1.     Acholi
 2.     Alur
 3.     Baamba
 4.     Babukusu
 
 
 5.     Babwisi
 6.     Bafumbira
 7.     Baganda
 8.     Bagisu
 9.     Bagungu
 10.    Bagwe
 11.    Bagwere
 12.    Bahehe
 13.    Bahororo
 14.    Bakenyi
 15.    Bakiga
 16.    Bakonzo
 17.    Banyabindi
 18.    Banyankore
 19.    Banyara
 20.    Banyarwanda
 21.    Banyole
 22.    Banyoro
 23.    Baruli
 24.    Basamia
 25.    Basoga
 26.    Basongora
 27.    Batagwenda
 28.    Batoro
 29.    Batuku
 30.    Batwa
 31.    Chope
 32.    Dodoth
 33.    Ethur
 34.    Ik (Teuso)
 35.    Iteso
 36.    Jopadhola
 37.    Jie
 
 
 38.    Jonam
 39.    Kakwa
 40.    Karimojong
 41.    Kebu (Okebu)
 42.    Kuku
 43.    Kumam
 44.    Langi
 45.    Lendu
 46.    Lugbara
 47.    Madi
 48.    Mening
 49.    Mvuba
 50.    Napore
 51.    Nubi
 52.    Nyangia
 53.    Pokot
 54.    Sabiny
 55.    So (Tepeth)
 56.    Vonoma
 FOURTH SCHEDULE
 Articles 15, 81, 82, 98, 108, 109, 111,115, 149 and 256
 OATHS
 OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
 I ....................................................  swear  in  the  nam e  of  the
 Almighty God/ solemhly affirm that I will be faithful and bear true
 allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and that I will preserve, protect
 and defend the Constitution. [So help me God.]
 191
 
 
 OATH OF PRESIDENT/VICE PRESIDENT
 
 I ......................................................... sw ear  in  the  nam e  of  the
 Almighty God/solemnly affirm/that I shall faithfully exercise the func-
 tions of the President/Vice-President of Uganda and shall uphold, pre-
 serve, protect, and defend the Constitution and observe the laws of
 Uganda and that I shall promote the welfare of the people of Uganda
 (So help me God.]
 JUDICIAL OATH
 I........................, swear in the name of the Almighty
 God/solemnly affirm that I will well and truly exercise the judicial func-
 tions entrusted to me and will do right to all manner of people in accor-
 dance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as by law estab-
 lished and in accordance with the laws and usage of the Republic of
 Uganda without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. (So help me God).
 SPEAKER/DEPUTY SPEAKER'S OATH
 I......................... swear in the name of the Almighty
 God/solemnly affirm that I will at all times well and truly serve the
 Republic of Uganda in the Office of Speaker/Deputy Speaker and that
 I will support and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda
 as by law established. (So help me God).
 OATH OF MINISTER
 I ................................................ being  appointed  a  M inister  of
 Uganda swear in the name of the Almighty God/solemnly affirm that
 I will at all times well and truly serve the Republic of Uganda in the
 office of a Minister; and that I will support and uphold the Constitution
 of the Republic of Uganda as by law established; and that I will to the
 best of my judgment at all times when required, freely give my coun-
 sel and advice to the President of Uganda and his/her successors in
 office as by law established for the good management of the public
 affairs of the Republic of Uganda; and that I will not directly or indi-
 rectly reveal any matter as shall come to my knowledge in the discharge
 of my duties and committed to my secrecy. [So help me God].
 
 
 OATH OF MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
 
 I......................... swear in the name of the Almighty
 God/solemnly affirm that I will give faithful service to this Parliament
 and support and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as
 by law established. (So help me God.)
 OATH OF SECRETARY TO THE CABINET
 I...................... being called upon to exercise the func-
 tions of Secretary to the Cabinet of Uganda swear in the name of the
 Almighty God/solemnly affirm that I will not directly or indirectly
 reveal such matters as shall be debated by the Cabinet and committed
 to my secrecy. (So help me God).
 FIFTH SCHEDULE
 Article 178
 AREAS OF CO-OPERATION AMONG DISTRICTS.
 (a) culture;
 (b) cultural and traditional lands;
 (c) promotion of local languages, crafts and antiquities;
 (d) education;
 (e) inter and intra-district roads;
 (f) health;
 (g) inter and intra-district development projects ; and
 (h) such other matters as the co-operating districts may
 resolve to be handled in common subject to this
 Constitution.
 
 
 SIXTH SCHEDULE
 
 Article 189
 FUNCTIONS AND SERVICES FOR WHICH
 GOVERNMENT IS RESPONSIBLE
 1. Arms, ammunition and explosives.
 2. Defence, security, maintenance of law and order.
 3. Banks, banking, promissory notes, currency and exchange
 control.
 4. Subject to this Constitution, taxation and taxation policy.
 5. Citizenship, immigration, emigration, refugees, deportation,
 extradition, passports and national identity cards.
 6. Copyrights, patents and trademarks and all forms of intellectual
 property, incorporation and regulation of business organisa-
 tions.
 7. Land, mines, mineral and water resources and the envi-
 ronment.
 8. National parks, as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 9. Public holidays.
 10. National monuments, antiquities, archives and public
 records, as Parliament may determine.
 11. Foreign relations and external trade.
 12. The regulation of trade and commerce.
 13. Making national plans for the provision of services and
 co-ordinating plans made by local governments.
 14. National elections.
 15. Energy policy.
 
 
 16. Transport and communications policy.
 
 17. National censuses and statistics.
 18. Public services of Uganda.
 19. The Judiciary.
 20. National standards.
 21. Education policy.
 22. National surveys and mapping.
 23. Industrial policy.
 24. Forest and game reserve policy.
 25. National research policy.
 26. Control and management of epidemics and disasters.
 27. Health policy.
 28. Agricultural policy.
 29. Any matter incidental to or connected with the functions
 and services mentioned in this Schedule.
 SEVENTH SCHEDULE
 Article 193
 UNCONDITIONAL GRANT TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
 Unconditional grant is the minimum amount to be paid to the local
 governments to run the decentralised services. For a given fiscal year,
 this amount is equal to the amount paid-to local governments in the
 preceding fiscal year for the same items adjusted* 1 for general price changes
 plus or minus the budgeted cost of running added or subtracted services;
 calculated in accordance with the following formula-
 Y1   =   Yo +bY0+X1
 = (l+b) Yo +X1
 
 
 Where       Y1    is the minimum unconditional grant for the current
 fiscal year;
 YO    is the minimum unconditional grant in the preceding
 fiscal year;
 b     is the percentage change if any, in the general
 price levels in the preceding fiscal year; and
 X1    is the net change in the budgeted cost of running
 added and subtracted services in the current year.
 For the purposes of this formula, the current fiscal year shall be
 taken to commence with fiscal year 1995/96.
 * 1 Note that the unconditional grant is equal to the sum of wage and non-wage components.
 Therefore, the wage components should be adjusted for the wage increase if any, while the non-
 wage component is adjusted for the changes in the general price levels.
 
 196
 
 
</pre>
