CONSTITUTION

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

SECTION

1.	Short title

2.	Interpretation

3.	Revocation and repeal of specified existing laws

4.	Establishment of Constitution

5.	Existing laws

6.	Existing offices

7.	The National Assembly

8.	Constituencies and voters’ roll

9.	Transitional provisions

10.	Prerogatives and privileges

11.	Succession to property by the Government

12.	Continuance of rights, liabilities and obligations

13.	Confirmation of titles and interest in land, etc.

14.	Legal proceedings

15.	Exercise of jurisdiction of High Court and other courts First Schedule—Provisions revoked or repealed

Second Schedule—Constitution of the Republic of Malawi

An Act to constitute the Republic of Malawi and to provide for matters incidental thereto or connected therewith

[6th July, 1966]

1.	This Act may be cited as the Republic of Malawi (Constitution) Act.

2. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—	) “the appointed day” means the 6th day of July, 1966;

“the Constitution” means the Constitution established by section 4 and set forth in the Second Schedule;

“the existing laws” means all Acts, Orders in Council, laws, rules, regulations, resolutions, orders or other instruments in writing having the effect of law in any part of Malawi immediately before the appointed day;

“the former Protectorate” means the former Protectorate of Nyasaland;

“the Government” means the authority, for the time being, in which is vested (whether before or after the appointed day) the executive power of Malawi.

(2)	Except where the context otherwise requires, expressions used in this Act have the same meaning as in the Constitution, and section 98 of the Constitution shall apply for the purposes of

interpreting this Act as it applies for the purposes of interpreting the Constitution.

(3)	Except where expressly otherwise provided, the General Interpretation Act shall apply, with any necessary adaptations, for the purpose of interpreting the Constitution, and otherwise in relation thereto, as it applies for the purpose of interpreting, and in relation to. Acts of Parliament.

3.	The existing laws specified in Column 1 of the First Schedule are revoked or repealed to the extent specified in Column 2 of the Schedule.

4.	Subject to this Act, the Constitution shall come into effect in Malawi on the appointed day.

5.	—(1) Subject to this section, and so far as is consistent with the Constitution, the existing laws shall continue in force after the appointed day as if they had been made in pursuance of the Constitution, but they shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with the Constitution, and in particular any reference therein to the Crown shall be construed as a reference to the Government.

(2)	The President may, by an order under his hand made at any time before the 6th July, 1967, make such amendments to any existing law as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for bringing that law into conformity with the provisions of this Act or the Constitution, or otherwise for enabling effect to be given to those provisions.

(3)	Where any matter that falls to be prescribed or otherwise provided for under the Constitution by Parliament or by any other authority or person is prescribed or provided for by or under an existing law (including any amendment to any such law made under this section) or is otherwise prescribed or provided for immediately before the appointed day, by or under the provisions revoked or repealed by section 3, that prescription or provision shall, as from the appointed day, have effect as if it had been made under the Constitution by Parliament or, as the case may be, by the other authority or person.

(4)	This section shall be without prejudice to any powers conferred by this Act or the Constitution upon any person or authority to make provision for any matter, including the amendment or repeal of any existing law.

6.	—(1) Where any office has been established by or under the provisions revoked by section 3 of this Act and the Constitution establishes a similar or an equivalent office, any person who

immediately before the appointed day holds or is acting in the former office shall, so far as is consistent with the Constitution, be deemed to have been appointed, elected or designated as from the appointed day to hold or to act in the latter office in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and to have taken any necessary oath under the Constitution:

Provided that any person who, under the provisions revoked by section 3 or under any existing law, would have been required to vacate his office at die expiration of any period or on the attainment of any age shall vacate his office at the expiration of that period or upon the attainment of that age.

(2) This section shall be without prejudice to—

(a)	section 7; and

(b)	any powers conferred by or under the Constitution upon any person or authority to make provision for the abolition of offices or the removal of persons holding or acting in any office.

7.—(1) Subject to subsection (2), the National Assembly constituted by the provisions revoked by section 3 (hereinafter in this section referred to as “the existing National Assembly”) shall be the National Assembly during the period beginning on the appointed day and ending on the first dissolution of Parliament thereafter and shall be deemed to have been constituted under section 19 of the Constitution.

(2)	The persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are the members of the existing National Assembly, and who represent general roll constituencies in the Assembly, shall continue to be the members of the National Assembly and, as from the appointed day, shall be deemed to have been elected to the National Assembly to represent the same constituencies as the constituencies for which they were respectively elected under the Nyasaland (Electoral Provisions) Order in Council, 1964, and shall hold their seats in the National Assembly in accordance with sections 23 and 28 of the Constitution.

(3)	The Special Roll constituencies constituted and delimited by the Nyasaland (Electoral Provisions) Order in Council, 1964, and the Regulations made thereunder shall cease to exist upon the appointed day, and the persons representing any of those constituencies on that day shall thereupon cease to be elected members of the National Assembly.

(4)	The persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the existing National Assembly shall continue to be, respectively, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly after the appointed day and, as from that time, shall be deemed to have been elected

as such in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and shall hold office in accordance with those provisions.

(5)	The Rules and Standing Orders of the existing National Assembly as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until it is otherwise provided under section 42 of the Constitution, be the rules and procedure of the National Assembly but shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with die Constitution.

(6)	Subject to section 45 (6) of the Constitution, Parliament shall, unless sooner dissolved, stand dissolved on the 7th July, 1971, and section 45 (5) of the Constitution shall be construed accordingly.

(7)	Any person who, under this section, continues to be Speaker, Deputy Speaker or a member of the National Assembly after the appointed day shall be deemed to have taken any necessary oath under the Constitution.

(8)	All moneys granted, voted or appropriated by the existing National Assembly to the service of the Government for the current financial year shall be deemed to have been granted, voted or appropriated by the National Assembly established by section 19 of the Constitution, and in accordance with the Constitution.

8.	—(1) Until other provision is made under section 31 of the Constitution, the boundaries of the fifty constituencies into which Malawi is divided by that section shall be the boundaries of the general roll constituencies established under the Nyasaland (Electoral Provisions) Order in Council, 1964, as delimited immediately before the appointed day.

(2)	For the purpose of section 31 of the Constitution, the date upon which the Electoral Commission shall be deemed to have last reviewed the boundaries of the constituencies into which Malawi is divided for the purposes of that section shall be the 1st April, 1966.

(3)	Subject to section 29 of the Constitution, every person who immediately before the appointed day is registered in any constituency as a voter in elections of members to the National Assembly shall continue to be so registered after the appointed day, until such time as a new or revised roll of voters shall have been prepared after the appointed day under an Act of Parliament.

9.	—(1) All rights and obligations under conventions, treaties or agreements which were exercisable by or binding upon the Government immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be so exerciseable and binding.

(2) All functions which immediately prior to the appointed day were vested in the Governor-General or in any other authority, shall, as far as the same continue in existence and are capable of being exercised after the appointed day, be vested in the President, or in the authority exercising similar functions under Constitution, as the case may be, except such functions as are by this Act or any other law vested in some other authority.

10.	Where under any existing law, constitutional custom or convention any prerogatives or privileges are vested in Her Majesty in respect of Malawi or in the Governor-General on behalf of Her Majesty, they shall with effect from the appointed day vest in the President and, subject to the Constitution or any other law, the President shall have power to do all things necessary for the exercise thereof.

*11. Subject to this Act, and the Constitution, all property of : every nature and kind whatsoever and all assets that, immediately before the appointed day, were vested in, or held in trust j for, Her Majesty or the Governor-General or in any other person in right of the Government of Malawi, shall on and after the appointed day be vested in or, as the case may be, held in trust for the Government:

Provided that such vesting or trust interest shall be subject to—

(a)	any rights in respect of any property or assets referred to in this section that, by or under any law, were granted, leased or otherwise disposed of to, or were recognized as being vested in, any person before the appointed day and that were subsisting immediately before the appointed day; and

(b)	any rights in respect of any property or assets referred to in this section that may, subject to any law, be granted, leased or otherwise disposed of to, or in trust for, any person on or after the appointed day by the Government, or by any person authorized in that behalf by the Government or by or under any law.

12.	All rights, liabilities and obligations, howsoever arising, of ( Her Majesty, the Governor-General or any public officer in f respect of the Government of Malawi before the appointed day a shall, on and after the appointed day, be rights, liabilities and t obligations respectively of the Government.

13.	All estates, interests or rights in or over land, minerals or c .mineral oils which the Governor of the former Protectorate, 1 the Governor-General or any other officer or authority, acting \

in exercise or purported exercise of any power in that behalf conferred by any law, had at any time before the appointed day validly created, granted or recognized, are hereby confirmed.

14.	—(1) All proceedings that, immediately before the appointed day, are pending before any court established by or under the provisions revoked by section 3 may be continued and concluded after the appointed day before the corresponding court established by or under the Constitution.

(2)	Any decision, order or sentence given before the appointed day by any such court as aforesaid shall, for the purpose of its enforcement or for the purpose of any appeal therefrom, have effect after the appointed day as if it were a decision of the corresponding court established by or under the Constitution.

15.	Until Parliament otherwise provides, the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Appeal, the High Court and of all subordinate courts (including Traditional Courts) shall, subject to this Act and any law in force in Malawi, be exercised in conformity with the existing laws and the substance of the common law and the doctrines of equity.

SECOND SCHEDULE	S

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

CHAPTER I The Republic

SECTION

1.	Declaration of the Republic

2.	Fundamental principles of Government

3.	The national territory

4.	Malawi a One-Party State

5.	Declaration of the national flag

6.	The Chiefs

CHAPTER II Citizenship

7.	Continuation of citizenship of Malawi after the appointed day

CHAPTER III The President

8.	The office of the President

9.	The first President

10.	Election of President

11.	Establishment of Electoral College to select the presidential

candidate

12.	Term of office of President and when vacancy arises

13.	Temporary provision for vacancy in office of President

14.	Committee of Appointment

15.	Performance of functions of President during his absence or illness

16.	Salary and allowances of President

17.	Presidential and other oaths of office

CHAPTER IV

Parliament

18.	Establishment of Parliament

19.	Composition of National Assembly

20.	Nominated members

21.	Election of members of National Assembly

22.	Direction and supervision of registration of voters and

conduct of elections

23.	Qualifications for election to National Assembly

24.	Disqualifications for election to National Assembly

SECTION

25.	Speaker

26.	Deputy Speaker

27.	[Repealed by 25 of 1971]

28.	Tenure of office of members of National Assembly

29.	The franchise

30.	Electoral Commission

31.	Constituencies

32.	Determination of questions as to membership of National

Assembly

33.	Clerk to National Assembly and his staff

34.	Interpretation

35.	Exercise of legislative power of Parliament

36.	Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures

37.	The President’s rights in the National Assembly

38.	Oaths to be taken by Speaker, Members and Clerk

39.	Presiding in National Assembly

40.	Quorum in National Assembly

41.	Voting in National Assembly

42.	Regulation of procedure in National Assembly

43.	Official language

44.	Sessions of Parliament

45.	Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament

46.	Sittings of National Assembly

CHAPTER V Executive Power of Malawi

47.	Executive authority of Malawi

48.	Command of armed forces

49.	Minister and Parliamentary Secretaries

50.	Appointment of Ministers not being members of the National

Assembly

51.	Oaths of Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries

52.	Special provisions during a dissolution of Parliament

53.	Cabinet

54.	Responsibility of Ministers

55.	Secretary to Cabinet

56.	Attorney General

57.	Permanent Secretaries

58.	Director of Public Prosecutions

59.	Special provisions relating to persons acting as' Attorney

General, Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor General

60.	President’s power of pardon, remission etc.

61.	Advisory Committee

CHAPTER VI The Judicature

62.	High Court

63.	Appointment of judges of High Court

64.	Tenure of office of judges

SECTION

65.	Oaths to be taken by judges

66.	Acting judges

67.	Supreme Court of Appeal

68.	Appeals to Supreme Court of Appeal

69.	Appeals from subordinate courts

70.	Supervisory jurisdiction of High Court

71.	Judicial Service Commission

72.	Appointment, etc. of judicial officers

73.

74.

•7<

/

76.

77.

78.

79.

80. 81. 82.

83.

84.

85.

CHAPTER VU Finance

Taxation to be imposed only under law

Consolidated Fund

Withdrawals from Consolidated Fund

Expenditure charged on Consolidated Fund

Annual Financial Statements

Appropriation Bills

Supplementary and excess expenditure

Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation

Contingencies Fund

Raising of loans by Government

Special funds and trust moneys

Development Fund

The Auditor-General and his functions

CHAPTER VIII The Public Service

86.	Public Service Commission

87.	Appointment, etc., of public officers

88.	Appointment of Director of Public Prosecutions

89.	Principal representatives of the Republic abroad

90.	Appointment of Permanent Secretaries, etc.

91.	Police Service Commission

92.	Appointment of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner of

Police

93.	Appointment, etc., of police officers

94.	Laws with respect to police discipline

95.	Regulations for the public service

CHAPTER IX Miscellaneous

96.	Resignation

97.	Amendment of Constitution

98.	Interpretation

CHAPTER I The Republic

1.	—(1) Malawi shall on the appointed day become a sovereign republic :

(2)	Except as otherwise provided by or under this Constitution, the powers of the Republic of Malawi derive from the people of Malawi and shall, subject to and in accordance with this Constitution, be vested in persons who are elected by and responsible to the people of Malawi.

2.	—(1) Subject to this Constitution, the Government of the Republic shall be founded upon the following principles—

(1)	The four corner-stones of the Government and the Nation shall be Unity, Loyalty, Obedience and Discipline;

(ii)	The paramount duty of the Government shall be to promote, safeguard and advance the welfare of the people of Malawi;

(iii)	The Government and the people of Malawi shall continue to recognize the sanctity of the personal liberties enshrined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and of adherence to the Law of Nations;

(iv)	No person should be deprived of his property without payment of fair compensation, and only where the public interest so requires;

(v)	All persons regardless of colour, race or creed should enjoy equal rights and freedoms;

(vi)	Recognition of the need for the ultimate unification of the peoples of Africa, for their common welfare and advancement.

(2)	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection (1) to the extent that the law in question is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order or the national economy.

3.	The national territory of the Republic shall consist of all the territory which was comprised in Malawi immediately before, the appointed day, and shall include all the islands, inland waters and air space of Malawi, and shall include any territory lawfully acquired thereafter by adjustment of boundaries or otherwise.

4.	—(1) There shall be in the Republic after the appointed day only one National Party.

(2)	The National Party shall be the Malawi Congress Party.

5.	—(1) The National Flag of which the design is described in subsection (2) is hereby declared to be the National Flag of Malawi.

(2) The design of the National Flag shall be— from the top of the Flag to the bottom thereof, three equal horizontal stripes of black, red and green with a red rising sun superimposed in the centre of the black stripe.

6.	The institution of Chieftaincy shall be recognized and preserved in the Republic, so that the Chiefs may make the fullest contribution to the welfare and development of the country in their traditional fields.

CHAPTER II Citizenship

7.	—(1) Subject to any law, every person who immediately before the appointed day was under any existing law a citizen of Malawi, shall continue to be a citizen of the Republic after the appointed day.

(2)	Parliament may make provision by Act of Parliament for' the acquisition of citizenship, or loss of citizenship, of the Republic by any person after the appointed day.

(3)	In this section, the expression—

“acquisition of citizenship” includes acquisition by birth, registration, naturalization or any other means prescribed by Parliament;

“loss of citizenship” includes loss by deprivation, renunciation or any other means prescribed by Parliament.

CHAPTER III

The President

8.	—(1) There shall be a President who shall be the Head of State, the supreme executive authority of the Republic, and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.

(2) The President shall, subject to this Constitution, have power—

(a)	to constitute offices for the Republic, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment;

(b)	to appoint, accredit, receive and recognize ambassadors and other diplomatic officers, consuls and other agents;

(c)	to confer honours and decorations;

id) to exercise the prerogative of mercy; and

(e) generally to exercise all such other functions as are by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament conferred upon or vested in the President.

(3)	Except as may otherwise be provided by an Act of Parliament, in the exercise of his functions the President shall act in his own discretion and shall not be obliged to follow advice tendered by any other person.

9.	The first President, having been duly elected to that office in accordance with the Election of the First President of the Republic Act, 1966, shall be Ngwazi Dr. H. Kamuzu Banda, who shall hold the office of President for his lifetime.

10.	—(1) Whenever Parliament is dissolved, or the office of President becomes vacant, an election shall be held to the office of President in such manner as, subject to the Constitution, may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	A person shall be qualified for election as President if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he—

(a)	is a citizen of the Republic;

(b)	has attained the age of 40 years;

(c)	is qualified as a voter for the purposes of elections to the National Assembly; and

(d)	is a member of the Party.

(3)	The provision in subsection (1) for an election to be held to the office of President whenever Parliament is dissolved shall not apply whilst the office of President is held by Ngwazi Dr. H. Kamuzu Banda under the provisions of section 9.

11.	—(1) There shall be an Electoral College for the purpose of nominating, for any election taking place after the appointed day, a candidate for the office of President.

(2) The Electoral College shall consist of the following persons—

(a)	The Members of the National Executive Committee of the Party;

(b)	The Members of the National Committee of the League of Malawi Women;

(c)	The Members of the National Committee of the League of Malawi Youth;

(d)	The Members of the Regional Committees of the Party;

(e)	The Chairmen, Secretaries and Treasurers of all District Committees of the Party;

(f)	The Chairmen, Secretaries and Treasurers of all District Committees of the League of Malawi Women;

(g)	The Chairmen, Secretaries and Treasurers of all District Committees of the League of Malawi Youth;

(h)	All Members of Parliament, except in the case where Parliament has been dissolved;

(0 All persons holding or acting in the office of Paramount Chief or Chief established under an Act of Parliament; and

(j) All Chairmen of District Councils.

(3)	The Chairman of the Electoral College shall be a person other than a person who is a candidate for nomination, and shall be appointed by the members of the National Executive Committee of the Party.

(4)	The Electoral College shall not be affected by any vacancy , in the membership thereof.

12.	—(1) Subject to subsection (2), the President shall continue ' in office until another person is elected to the office of President. J

(2)	The office of President shall become vacant on—	;

(a)	the death or resignation of the holder of the office; >

(b)	the rejection at a Presidential election of a holder of the office who has been nominated for re-election.

13.	—(1) Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of President, or the President is so incapacitated as to be unable to appoint a Presidential Commission, the functions of that office shall be performed by a Presidential Council consisting of—

(a)	the Secretary-General of the Party who shall be Chairman of the Presidential Council;

(b)	two Cabinet Ministers, each of whom is also a member of the National Executive Committee of the Party (in this Chapter referred to as “the National Executive Committee”) appointed by a Committee of Appointment in accordance with section 14 who shall be members of the Presidential Council.

(2)	A Presidential Council shall hold office until a new President assumes office or, as the case may be, the President regains his capacity to appoint a Presidential Commission or to exercise the other functions of his office.

14.	—(1) Whenever under section 13 (1) it becomes necessary < to appoint a Presidential Council, the Secretary-General shall ' forthwith convene a joint meeting of the National Executive Committee and all Cabinet Ministers (hereinafter referred to as “the Committee of Appointment”) for the purpose of appointing two Cabinet Ministers, duly qualified in terms of section 13, to a Presidential Council.

(2) The Committee of Appointment when convened shall appoint, in accordance with such procedure, if any, as may be

prescribed by an Act of Parliament, two Cabinet Ministers (each of whom is also a member of the National Executive Committee) to be members of the Presidential Council.

(3)	Where, after a Presidential Council has been appointed any member thereof is for any reason unable to perform his duties, the Committee of Appointment may appoint another duly qualified person in his place.

15.	—(1) Whenever the President considers it desirable by reason of illness, temporary absence from the Republic or any other cause which prevents him from performing the functions of the office of President, he may by directions in writing appoint three Cabinet Ministers to be a Presidential Commission to perform such functions of the office of President as, subject to subsection (5), he may specify in those directions.

(2)	The President shall appoint a person to be Chairman of the Commission, and may specify that the Chairmanship shall change from time to time during the period in which the Commission performs its functions.

(3)	The Presidential Commission may act by any two of its members.

(4)	When the circumstances requiring the appointment of a Presidential Commission under this section have come to an end, the Commission shall be automatically dissolved.

(5)	Where a Commission has performed any functions under this section, the President may within a period of 30 days after resuming office revoke or vary any decision made by the Commission which, but for this subsection, would be irrevocable.

(6)	Where a Presidential Commission has been appointed and is still in being when a vacancy occurs in the office of President, then until a Presidential Council is appointed, the Presidential Commission shall continue to exercise the functions of the office of President in accordance with this section.

(7)	The Presidential Commission shall not exercise the powers of the President to dissolve Parliament.

16.	—(1) The President shall receive such salary and allowances and on retirement such pension, gratuity or other allowance as may from time to time be determined by the National Assembly.

(2)	The salary and allowances of the President shall not without his consent be reduced during his period of office.

(3)	The salary, allowances and pension or gratuity of the President shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.

17.	—(1) The President shall assume office by taking an Oath in the following form, which shall be administered in public by the Chief Justice—

“I ...........................................  do	solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the functions of the high office of President of the Republic of Malawi, and that I will preserve and defend the Constitution, and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. So help me God.”

(2)	Every member of a Presidential Council or Presidential Commission shall, before assuming the duties of the office, take an Oath of Allegiance and such Oath for the due performance of office, as may be prescribed by Parliament.

(3)	Instead of taking an oath the President, or any person to whom subsection (2) applies, may, if he thinks fit, make an affirmation which shall be in the like form with the substitution of affirm for swear, and the omission of the final sentence.

CHAPTER IV Parliament Part 1—Composition of Parliament

18.	—(1) There shall be a Parliament of the Republic which shall consist of the President and the National Assembly.

(2) The legislative power of the Republic shall vest in the Parliament.

19.	—(1) The National Assembly shall consist of—

(a)	sixty-three elected members;

(b)	such nominated members as may be appointed under section 20; and

(c)	such persons as are members by virtue of being Ministers under section 50 (2).

(2) If a person who is not a member of the National Assembly is appointed by the President to the office of Speaker of the Assembly that person shall, by virtue of holding that office, be a member of the Assembly in addition to the members referred to in subsection (1).

20.	The President may appoint as nominated members of the National Assembly such persons, not exceeding fifteen in number, as he considers desirable so to do in order to enhance the representative character of the Assembly, or to represent particular minority or other special interests in the Republic.

21.	—(1) Each of the sixty-three constituencies provided for in section 31 shall elect one member to the National Assembly in such manner as, subject to this Constitution, may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	Every person who is registered in any constituency as a voter for elections of members to the National Assembly shall be entitled so to vote in that constituency in accordance with any law in that behalf, and no other person may so vote.

22.	The registration of voters in elections of members of the National Assembly and the conduct of such elections shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Electoral Commission.

23.	Subject to section 24, a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he—

(a)	is a citizen of the Republic who has attained the age of 25 years unless, in any particular case, the President shall specify the age of 21 years,

(b)	is able to speak and to read the English language well enough to take an active part in the proceedings of the Assembly;

(c)	is registered as a voter in a constituency; and

(d)	is a member of the Party.

24.	—(1) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly who—

(a)	is under a declaration of allegiance to some country other than the Republic;

(b)	is, under any law in force in the Republic, adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind;

(c)	is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in the Republic either before or after the appointed day, or under a sentence of imprisonment (by whatever name called) imposed on him at any such time by any such court or substituted by competent authority for some other sentence imposed on him by such a court;

{d) is detained under a detention order or is subject to a control order or a restriction order; or

(e)	is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in the Republic.

(2) No person who holds the office of President, or who has

been nominated as a candidate for that office under section 11, shall be qualified for election as a member of the National Assembly.

(3)	Parliament may provide that, subject to such exceptions and limitations (if any) as may be prescribed by law. a person shall be disqualified for membership of the National Assembly by virtue of—

(a)	his holding or acting in any office or appointment that may be prescribed by Parliament;

(b)	his belonging to any of the armed forces or to any police force;

(c)	his having been convicted by any court of any offence that is prescribed by Parliament and that is connected with elections of the President or of the members of the National Assembly:

Provided that in any such case the period of disqualification shall not exceed a period of 7 years from the date of such conviction; or

(d) his having been required to vacate his seat in the Assembly under section 28 (2) (,?):

Provided that in any case under this paragraph the period of disqualification shall not exceed a period of five years from the date when such person was required to vacate his seat.

25.—(1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be appointed by the President from among persons who are members of the Assembly or who are qualified to be elected as such.

(2)	The President, a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, or any person holding or acting in any office that is for the purposes of this section prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, shall not be qualified to be appointed as Speaker.

(3)	The Speaker shall vacate his office—

(a)	if. having been appointed from among the members of the National Assembly, he ceases to be a member of the Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of the Assembly;

(b)	if any circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would disqualify him for appointment as such;

(c)	if the President so directs.

(4)	No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly at any time when the office of Speaker is vacant.

26.	—(1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected from among the persons who are members of the Assembly other than Ministers, Parliamentary Secretaries, or persons holding or acting in any office that is for the purposes of this section prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	The members of the National Assembly shall elect a person to the office of Deputy Speaker when the Assembly first sits after any dissolution of Parliament and, if the office becomes vacant otherwise than by reason of the dissolution of Parliament, at the first sitting of the Assembly after the office becomes vacant.

(3)	The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office—

(a)	if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly;

(b)	if he assumes the office of President;

(c)	if he becomes a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary or a person holding or acting in any office prescribed under subsection (1);

(d)	if he is appointed as Speaker; or

(e)	if the Assembly, by a resolution supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof, resolves that he be removed from office.

27.	[Repealed by 25 of 1971]

28.	—(1) Every member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat in the Assembly upon a dissolution of Parliament.

(2)	A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat in the Assembly and cease to be a member thereof—

(a)	if, being an elected member, he ceases to be a citizen of the Republic;

(b)	if he assumes the office of President;

(c)	if he is absent from the sittings of the Assembly for such period and in such circumstances as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly;

(d)	if he is sentenced by a court in the Republic to death or to imprisonment (by whatever name called) for a term exceeding twelve months;

(e)	subject to subsection (4), if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified for election as such under section 24 (1) (a), (b),

(d)	or (e), or under any law made by Parliament under section 24;

(/) if, having as a Parliamentary candidate made a declaration at the next previous Parliamentary election that he supported the President as the Presidential candidate, he votes against the President on the taking in the National Assembly of a motion of confidence in the Government;

(g)	if his seat becomes vacant under any law made by Parliament providing for a seat in the Assembly to become vacant by reason of the failure of a member to retain the confidence and support of a majority of the voters in the constituency where he was elected;

(h)	if, in the case of an elected member, the Secretary-General has notified the Speaker in writing that he has ceased to be a member of the Party; or

(i)	if, being a member appointed under section 20, the President so directs.

(3)	The Speaker shall give notice in the Gazette of the fact that the seat of any member of the Assembly has become vacant under this section.

(4)	Parliament may, in order to permit any member of the National Assembly who has been sentenced to death or imprisonment, adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, adjudged or declared bankrupt or convicted of any offence prescribed under section 24 to appeal against the decision in accordance with any law, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament, the decision shall not have effect for the purpose of this section until such time as may be so prescribed.

(5)	For the purposes of this section, two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required to be served consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentences if none of those sentences exceeds twelve months.

29.—(1) Subject to this section and any other law, every citizen of the Republic who has attained the age of twenty-one years shall be entitled to be registered under an Act made in that behalf as a voter for the purposes of elections of members to the National Assembly, and no other person may so be registered.

(2) Subject to subsection (3), a person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter in a constituency if, and shall not be so qualified unless, at the date of his application for registration he—

(a)	is a citizen of the Republic;

(b)	has attained the age of twenty-one years;

(c)	is ordinarily resident in the Republic and has been ordinarily resident in the Republic at any time for a continuous period of two years; and

(d)	is ordinarily resident in that constituency or was born there or is employed or carries on a business there.

(3)	No person shall be qualified for registration as a voter in a constituency—

(a)	if he is, under any law in force in the Republic, adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind;

(b)	if he is under sentence of death imposed on him by a court having jurisdiction in the Republic, either before or after the appointed day;

(c)	if under any law made by Parliament he is disqualified for registration as a voter on the grounds of his having been convicted of an offence connected with elections, or for infringement of subsection (4).

(4)	Where any person is qualified to be registered in more than one constituency as a voter he may be so registered only in one constituency.

30.—(1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two or more than four other members and shall exercise such functions in relation to elections as may be conferred upon it by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament.

(2)	The members of the Electoral Commission shall be appointed by the President.

(3)	A person shall not be qualified to hold the office of a Member of the Electoral Commission if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, a member of the National Assembly or a public officer.

(4)	Subject to this section, a member of the Electoral Commission shall vacate his office—

(a)	at the expiration of four years from the date of his appointment; or

(b)	if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such.

(5)	A member of the Electoral Commission may be removed from office by the President, on the grounds of inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.

31.	—(1) For the purposes of elections to the National Assembly, the Republic shall be divided into sixty-three constituencies in such manner as the Electoral Commission, acting with the approval of the National Assembly signified by resolution, may prescribe.

(2)	So far as appears to the Electoral Commission practicable and subject to subsection (3), every constituency shall contain the number of voters registered on the voters roll that is equal to the electoral quota in respect of the voters roll.

(3)	The Electoral Commission may depart from the principles specified in subsection (2) to such extent as it considers expedient in order to take account of—

(a)	the density of population;

(b)	the means of communication;

(c)	geographical features; and

(d)	the boundaries of existing administrative areas.

(4)	The Electoral Commission shall review the boundaries all constituencies at intervals of not less than three nor more than five years, and may alter the boundaries of the constituencies in accordance with this section:

Provided that the Electoral Commission shall carry out such review and, in accordance with this section, alter the boundaries of the constituencies whenever Parliament has made provision altering the number of constituencies; and, in addition, the Electoral Commission may at any time carry out such a review and alter the boundaries of the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this section whenever, and to such extent as, it considers necessary by reason of substantial changes in the density of the population of any part or parts of Malawi.

(5)	Any alteration of the constituencies under this section shall come into effect upon such date as the President may by Order direct.

(6)	For the purposes of this section the electoral quota in respect of the roll of voters shall be the number ascertained by dividing the number of voters for the time being registered throughout the Republic on that roll by sixty-three.

32.	—(1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether any person has been validly elected as a member of the National Assembly or the seat of any such member has become vacant.

(2)	Parliament may make provision with respect to—

(a)	the persons who may apply to the High Court for the

determination of any question under this section;

(b)	the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon which any such application may be made; and

(c)	the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in

relation to any such application.

(3)	The determination by the High Court of any question under this section shall not be subject to appeal.

33.	—(1) There shall be a Clerk to the National Assembly.

(2) Unless Parliament by Resolution otherwise provides, the office of the Clerk to the National Assembly and the offices of the members of his staff shall be public offices.

34.	In this Part of this Chapter—

“sentence of imprisonment” shall be construed as not including a sentence of imprisonment the execution of which is suspended, or a sentence of imprisonment imposed in default of payment of a fine; and “belonging to any of the armed forces or to any police force” shall be construed as not including a person who is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service in any such forces or force.

Part 2—Legislation and Procedure in National Assembly

35.	—(1) Subject to this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good government of the Republic.

(2)	Subject to this Constitution, the legislative power of Parliament shall be exercised by Bills passed by the National Assembly and assented to by the President.

(3)	Where a Bill is presented to the President for his assent he shall either assent or withhold his assent.

(4)	Where the President withholds his assent to a Bill, the Bill shall be returned to the Speaker by the President with a notification that the President’s assent has been withheld, and the Bill shall not be again debated by the National Assembly until after the expiry of twenty-one days from the date of the withholding of the President’s assent.

(5)	If the Bill is debated again and passed by the National Assembly at any time between the date of the expiry of the twenty-one days referred to in subsection (4) and six months from that date, the Bill shall be again presented to the President for his assent.

(6)	Where a Bill is again presented to the President for assent in accordance with subsection (5), the President shall assent to the Bill within twenty-one days of its presentation, unless he sooner dissolves Parliament.

(7)	When a Bill that has been duly passed is assented to in accordance with this Constitution it shall become law and the President shall thereupon cause it to be published in the Gazette.

(8)	No law made by Parliament shall come into operation until it has been published in the Gazette, but Parliament may postpone the coming into operation of any such law and may make laws with retrospective effect.

36.	Except upon the recommendation of the Minister responsible for Finance signified in writing, the National Assembly shall not—

(a)	proceed upon any Bill (including any amendment to a Bill) that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of die following purposes—

(i)	for the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;

(ii)	for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Fund, or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;

(iii)	for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of any moneys not charged thereon, or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal; or

(iv)	for the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government;

(b)	proceed upon any motion (including any amendment to a motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of those purposes; or

(c)	receive any petition that, in the opinion of the person presiding, requests that provision be made for any of those purposes.

37.	The President may at any time—

(a)	attend the National Assembly;

(b)	as Head of State, address the National Assembly and send messages to the National Assembly to be read to the Assembly by a Minister designated by the President; and

(c)	as Leader of the Government, address die National Assembly and take part in its proceedings and in the proceedings of any Committee of the Assembly as if he were a member of the Assembly;

Provided that the President shall not be entitled to vote in the National Assembly or in any Committee thereof.

38.	—(1) The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Clerk to die National Assembly before assuming the duties of their respective offices, and every member of die 'National Assembly before taking his seat therein, shall take and subscribe before the Assembly the oath of allegiance in the form prescribed by law.

(2)	The Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Clerk to the National Assembly shall, in addition to taking and subscribing

the oath of allegiance and before assuming ,the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe such oaths for the due performance 'of their respective offices as may be prescribed by law.

(3)	The oaths of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be tendered by and subscribed before the President, and the oaths of all other members of the National Assembly and of the Clerk to the National Assembly shall be tendered by and subscribed before the Speaker or, in his absence, the Deputy Speaker.

39.	There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly—

(a)	the Speaker;

(b)	in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or

(c)	in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker,

such members the Assembly (not being a Minister or a

Parliamentary Secretary) as the Assembly may elect for that

sitting.

40.	If objection is taken by any member of the National Assembly present that there are present in the Assembly (besides the person presiding) less than one-fourth of all the members of the Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules' of procedure of the Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that the number of members present is still less than one-fourth of all the members of the Assembly, he shall thereupon adjourn the Assembly.

41.	—(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any. question proposed for decision shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting. *

(2)	The Speaker shall not have an original vote, but, if upon any question before the National Assembly the votes are equally divided, he shall have and exercise a casting vote.

(3)	Any member of the National Assembly, other than the Speaker, shall, when presiding in the Assembly, retain his original deliberative vote as a member and shall also have and exercise a casting vote where the votes are equally divided.

(4)	The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may make provision under which a member who votes upon a question in which he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted.

42.	—(1) Subject to this Constitution, the National Assembly may regulate its own procedure.

(2)	The National Assembly may act notwithstanding any

vacancy in its membership (including any vacancy not filled when the Assembly first meets after any dissolution) and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly shall not invalidate those proceedings.

43.	The proceedings of the National Assembly shall be conducted in the English language.

Part 3—Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution

44.	—(1) Every session of Parliament shall be held at such place within the Republic and shall commence at such time as the President may appoint.

(2)	There shall be a session of Parliament at least once in every year so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of Parliament in one session and the first sitting thereof in the next session.

(3)	Whenever Parliament is dissolved a general election of members of the National Assembly shall be held within 60 days of the date of the dissolution and a session of Parliament shall be appointed to commence within 45 days of the date appointed by an order, made by the Electoral Commission under an Act of Parliament, as the polling day for that election or. if more than one polling day be appointed, the last polling day.

(4)	If, after a dissolution and before the holding of a general election of members of the National Assembly, the President is of the opinion that, owing to the existence of a state of war or of a state of emergency in the Republic, it is necessary to recall Parliament, the President shall summon the Parliament that has been dissolved to meet, but, unless the life of Parliament is extended under section 45 (6), the general election of members of the National Assembly shall proceed and the Parliament that has been recalled shall, if not sooner dissolved, again stand dissolved on the date appointed for the nomination of candidates in that general election.

45.	—(1) The President may at any time prorogue Parliament.

(2)	The President may at any time dissolve Parliament.

(3)	If the President dies or resigns his office, Parliament shall forthwith stand dissolved.

(4)	If the National Assembly passes a resolution that it has no confidence in the Government, the President shall, within three days of the date of the passing of such resolution, dissolve Parliament.

(5)	Subject to subsection (6), Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date of its first sitting after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved.

(6)	At any time when the Republic is at war, Parliament may from time to time extend the period of five years specified in subsection (5) for not more than twelve months at a time:

Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.

46.—(1) The President may, at any time, summon a meeting of the National Assembly.

(2)	Subject to subsection (1), the sittings of the National Assembly in any session of Parliament after the commencement of that session shall be held at such times and on such days as the Assembly shall appoint.

(3)	The President, every Minister, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, and every member of the National Assembly shall, except in cases of treason, felony or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest in going to, returning from or while in the precincts of the National Assembly, and shall not, in respect of any utterance in the National Assembly, be amenable to any action or proceedings in any Court, tribunal or body other than the National Assembly itself.

(4)	All official reports and publications of the National Assembly or of its proceedings or of any Committee of the National Assembly shall be privileged and utterances made in the National Assembly or of any Committee thereof wherever published shall be protected by absolute privilege.

CHAPTER V Executive Power of Malawi

47.	—(1) The executive power and authority of the Republic shall vest in the President and, subject to this Constitution, shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him.

(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent Parliament from conferring functions on persons or authorities other than the President.

48.	—(1) The supreme command of the armed forces shall vest in the President as Commander-in-Chief.

(2) The powers conferred on the President by subsection (1) shall include—

(a)	the power to determine the operational use of the armed

forces;

(b)	the power to appoint and remove from office the Army Commander and other members of the armed forces.

(3)	The President may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as he may think fit, delegate to any member of the armed forces any of the powers conferred upon him by this section.

(4)	Parliament may regulate the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this section.

49.	—(1) There shall be such offices of Minister of the Government as may be established by an Act of Parliament or, subject to any Act of Parliament, by the President.

(2)	Subject to section 50, appointments to the office of Minister shall be made by the President from among the members of the National Assembly.

(3)	The President may appoint Parliamentary Secretaries from among the members of the National Assembly to assist Ministers in the performance of their duties.

(4)	The office of a Minister who is a member of the National Assembly, or of a Parliamentary Secretary shall become vacant—

(a)	if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament;

(b)	if, at the first sitting of the Assembly after any dissolution of Parliament, the holder of the office is not a member of the Assembly, unless he is immediately appointed a Minister under section 50;

(c)	if the President so directs;

0d) upon the assumption by any person of the office of President; or

(e) if the Minister or Parliamentary Secretary dies or resigns from his office:

Provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any Minister who is a member of the National Assembly solely by virtue of section 50 (2).

50.	—(1) The President may, whenever he considers it desirable or expedient so to do, appoint to the office of Minister such persons who are not members of the National Assembly whom he considers, by reason of their special qualifications, knowledge or experience, to be fit and proper persons to hold such office.

(2) Ministers appointed pursuant to subsection (1) shall, by virtue of such appointment, be members of the National Assembly for the duration of their holding of the office of Minister.

(3)	The office of any Minister appointed under this section shall become vacant—

(a)	if the President so directs;

(b)	upon the assumption by any person of the office of President; or

(c)	if the Minister dies or resigns from office.

51.	A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office in such form and manner as may be prescribed by Parliament.

52.	For the purposes of section 49, during any period when Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a member of the National Assembly immediately before that dissolution shall be regarded as continuing as a member of the Assembly.

53.	—(1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers consisting of the President and such Ministers as may from time to time be appointed as members of the Cabinet by the President.

(2)	The Cabinet shall be responsible for advising the President with respect to the policies of the Government and with respect to such other matters as may be referred to it by the President.

(3)	The Cabinet shall be collectively responsible to Parliament for all things done by or under the authority of any Minister in the execution of his office.

(4)	In any case where there is in being a Presidential Commission or Presidential Council, every member of the Presidential Commission or Presidential Council shall be a member of the Cabinet.

(5)	There shall preside at meetings of the Cabinet—

(a)	the President; or

(b)	in the temporary absence of the President, such Minister as the President may designate; or

(c)	in any case where the functions of the President are being performed by a Presidential Council, the Secretary-General of the Malawi Congress Party; or

(d)	in any case where the functions of the President are being performed by a Presidential Commission, the Chairman of the Commission appointed by the President under section 15(1).

54.	The President may, by directions in writing, assign to himself or any Minister responsibility for any business of the Government, including the administration of any department of the Government.

55.	—(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet whose office shall be a public office.

(2) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall have charge of the Cabinet office and shall be responsible, in accordance with such instructions as may be given to him by the President, for arranging the business for, and keeping the minutes of, the Cabinet and for conveying the decisions of the Cabinet to the appropriate persons or authorities and shall have such other functions as the President may direct.

56.	—(1) There shall be an Attorney General, who shall be the principal legal advisor to the Government.

(2)	The Attorney General shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the President.

(3)	The office of Attorney General may be the office of a Minister or a public officer.

57.	Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of Government, he shall exercise general direction and control over that department and, subject to such direction and control, the department shall be under the supervision of a Permanent Secretary, whose office shall be a public office:

Provided that two or more Government departments may be placed under the supervision of one Permanent Secretary, and one Government department may be placed under the supervision of two or more Permanent Secretaries.

58.	—U) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions, whose office shall be a public office.

(2) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have power in any case in which he considers it desirable so to do—

(a)	to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court (other than a court-martial) in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by that person;

(b)	to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings that have been instituted or undertaken by any other person or authority; and

(c)	to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered any such criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by himself or any other person or authority.

(3)	The powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions under subsection (2) may be exercised by him in person or by officers subordinate to him acting in accordance with his general or special instructions.

(4)	Subject to subsection (6), the powers conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2) (b) and (c) shall be vested in him to the exclusion of any other person or authority:

Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.

(5)	For the purposes of this section, any appeal from any judgment in any criminal proceedings before any court, or any case stated or question of law reserved for the purpose of any such proceedings to any other court, shall be deemed to be part of those proceedings:

Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2) (c) shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.

(6)	In the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this section, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall at all times be subject to the general or special directions of the Attorney General:

Provided that, where the Attorney General is not a Minister, the Minister for the time being responsible for the Administration of Justice may at any time require such case or class of case as he may specify to be submitted to him for the purpose of giving a direction as to whether or not criminal proceedings be instituted or discontinued.

59.	If the office of—

(a)	Attorney General;

(b)	Director of Public Prosecutions; or

(c)	Auditor General, is vacant, or if the holder of any of those offices is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person to act as Attorney General, Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor General, as the case may be, pending an appointment to any of those offices, or for so long as the officer concerned is unable to exercise the functions of the office.

60.	The President, in the exercise of the prerogative of mercy, may—

(a)	grant to any person concerned in or convicted of any offence a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions;

(b)	grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for any offence;

(c)	substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on any person for any offence; or

(id) remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any person for an offence, or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to the Government on account of any offence.

61.	—(1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the prerogative of mercy which shall consist of such persons as may ' be appointed by the President.

(2)	The President may appoint different persons to the Advisory Committee for the purposes of advising him in relation to persons convicted by courts-martial and for the purposes of advising him in relation to persons convicted by other courts.

(3)	A member of the Advisory Committee shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

(4)	Where any person has been sentenced to death for any offence, the President shall cause the question of the exercise, in relation to that person, of the powers conferred by section 60, to be considered at a meeting of the Advisory Committee.

(5)	Subject to subsection (4), the President may refer to the Advisory Committee any question as to the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by section 60.

CHAPTER VI The Judicature Part 1—The High Court

62.	—(1) There shall be a High Court for the Republic which shall have unlimited original jurisdiction to hear and determine any civil or criminal proceedings under any law and such other jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other law.

(2) The judges of the High Court shall be—

(a)	the Chief Justice; and

(b)	such number of Judges, not being less than two, as may be prescribed by Parliament.

(3) The High Court shall be a superior court of record and, except as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court.

63.—(1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the President.

(2)	The Judges shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission.

(3)	(a) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge unless—

(i)	he is, or has been, a Judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil or criminal proceedings; or .

(ii)	he is entitled to practise as an advocate or a solicitor in such a court;

(b) for the purposes of this subsection, a person shall be regarded as entitled to practise as an advocate or a solicitor if he has been called, enrolled or otherwise admitted as such (and has not subsequently been disbarred or removed from the roll of advocates or solicitors) notwithstanding that—

(i)	he holds or acts in any office the holder of which is, by reason of his office, precluded from practising in a court; or

(ii)	he does not hold a practising certificate or has not satisfied any other like condition of his being permitted to practise.

(4)	If the office of Chief Justice is vacant, or if the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office, or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such Justice of Appeal or Judge, or such other person qualified for appointment as a Judge as the President may appoint:

Provided that a person who is neither a Justice of Appeal nor a Judge, may be so appointed, notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the purposes of section 64 (1) and

(5).

(5)	If the office of any Judge is vacant or if any Judge is appointed to act as Chief Justice, or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, or if the President is satisfied that the state of business in the High Court requires that the number of Judges of the court should be temporarily increased, the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may appoint a person qualified for appointment as a judge to act as a Judge:

Provided that, for the purposes of this subsection, a person may act as a Judge notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the purposes of section 64 (1) and (5).

(6)	Any person appointed under subsection (5) to act as a Judge shall, subject to section 64 (3) and (4), continue to act for the period of his appointment or, if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the President after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission:

Provided that the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a person whose appointment to act as a Judge has expired or been revoked to continue to act as such a Judge for such period as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other matter or thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto.

64.—(1) Subject to this section, a person holding the office of a Judge shall vacate that office on attaining the prescribed age:

Provided that the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a Judge who has attained that age to continue in office for such period as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age.

(2)	A person holding the office of Judge may be removed from office only for incompetence in the performance of the duties of his office or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with subsections (3) and (4).

(3)	The President may by an instrument under the Public Seal remove from his office any Judge where a motion praying for his removal on the ground of incompetence in the performance of the duties of his office or misbehaviour has been—

(a)	debated in the National Assembly;

(b)	passed by a majority of the votes of all the members of

the Assembly; and

(c)	submitted to the President as a petition for the removal

of the Judge concerned.

(4)	Where notice of intention to introduce before the National Assembly a motion praying for the removal of a Judge from his office has been lodged in the office of the Speaker, the President may, where after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission he is satisfied that it is in the public interest so to do, suspend the Judge from performing the functions of his office. Any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, and shall in any case cease to have effect where the motion is withdrawn before being debated in the National Assembly or, upon being debated, is not passed by a majority thereof.

(5)	The prescribed age for the purposes of subsection (1) shall be the age of sixty-two years or such other age as may be prescribed by Parliament:

Provided that a law made by Parliament, to the extent that it alters the age at which a Judge shall vacate his office, shall not have effect in relation to a Judge after his appointment unless he consents to its having effect.

(6)	This section shall be without prejudice to section 63 (6).

65.	A Judge shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office in such form and manner as may be prescribed by law.

66.	Save where the context otherwise requires, any references in this Constitution to the Chief Justice, a Justice of Appeal, or a Judge shall be construed as including a reference to any person who, under this Constitution, is for the time being performing the duties of the Chief Justice, a Justice of Appeal or a Judge respectively.

Part 2—The Supreme Court of Appeal

67.—(1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Appeal for Malawi which, subject to this Constitution, shall have such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or by any other law.

(2)	The Justices of the Supreme Court of Appeal shall be—

(a)	the Chief Justice;

(b)	such number of Justices of Appeal (if any) as may be

prescribed by Parliament; and

(c)	the other Judges of the High Court for the time being

holding office.

(3)	The Supreme Court of Appeal shall be a superior court of record and, except as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court.

(4)	When the Supreme Court of Appeal is determining any matter, other than an interlocutory matter, it shall be composed of an uneven number of Justices, not being less than three.

(5)	Sections 63 (2), 63 (3), 63 (5), 63 (6), 64 and 65 shall apply in relation to a Justice of Appeal as they apply in relation to a Judge.

Part 3—Appeals

68.	—(1) Subject to section 32 (2), an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court to the Supreme Court of Appeal as of right in the following cases—

(а)	where the matter in dispute on the appeal to the Supreme Court of Appeal is of the value of K 1,000 or upwards or where the appeal involves directly or indirectly a claim to or question respecting property or a right of the value of K 1,000 or upwards, final decisions in any civil proceedings (not being made with the consent of the parties);

(б)	final decisions (other than decisions on appeal or review) in any criminal proceedings;

(c)	final decisions in proceedings for dissolution or nullity of marriage;

(d)	final decisions in any proceedings on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution; and

(e)	in such other cases as may be prescribed by Parliament.

(2)	Notwithstanding subsection (1), Parliament may make provision as to—

(a)	the time within which any appeal is to be instituted;

(b)	the fees to be charged in respect of appeal proceedings;

(c)	the costs of and incidental to appeal proceedings;

(d)	the summary determination of any appeal which appears to the appellate court—

(i)	to be frivolous or vexatious;

(ii)	to raise no sufficient ground which would enable the appeal to succeed; or

(iii)	to be brought for purposes of delay;

(e)	the removal or limitation of any right of appeal in any case in which the accused is—

(i)	acquitted; or

(ii)	convicted on his own plea of guilty.

69.	Subject to the provisions of the Traditional Courts Act relating to appeals, an appeal shall lie as of right to the High Court from final decisions given by any subordinate court in any case in which, if the decision of the subordinate court were a decision of the High Court, an appeal would lie as of right to the Supreme Court of Appeal under section 68:

Provided that—

(a) an appeal shall not lie direct to the High Court from a decision given by a subordinate court in any such case if, under any law, an appeal lies as of right from that decision to another subordinate court;

(b)	Parliament may make provision removing or limiting any right of appeal conferred by this section in any case in which the High Court in exercise of any powers of review conferred upon it has reviewed in open court any proceedings of a subordinate court, the accused having first had an opportunity to be heard either personally or by counsel;

(c)	Parliament may make such provision regarding such appeals as it may make in respect of appeals from the High Court under section 68 (2).

70.	—(1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to supervise any civil or criminal proceedings before any court to which this section applies and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purposes of ensuring that justice is duly administered by any such court.

(2)	The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to the jurisdiction and powers conferred on it by subsection (1).

(3)	This section applies to every subordinate court (other than a Traditional Court) and to such Traditional Courts and such courts-martial as may be prescribed by Parliament.

Part 4—Judicial Service Commission

71.	There shall be a Judicial Service Commission which shall consist of—

(a) the Chief Justice, who shall be Chairman;

ib) the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or such other member of that Commission as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Chairman of that Commission; and

(c)	such Justice of Appeal or judge as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the President acting after consultation with the Chief Justice.

72.	—(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices to which this section applies (including power to confirm appointments), and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the President.

(2)	The President may, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, delegate any of his powers under this section by direction in writing to the Judicial Service Commission or any member thereof, or any judge or any person holding or acting in any office to which this section applies.

(3)	The Judicial Service Commission shall advise the President in relation to the appointment of persons to hold or act in any

office to which this section applies, the confirmation of such appointments or the removal of any such persons from office, but the President shall not be bound by any such advice.

(4)	The Judicial Service Commission shall, subject to the general or special directions of the President, given from time to time, exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any office to which this section applies.

(5)	The offices to which this section applies are—

(a)	the office of Registrar or Deputy Registrar of the Supreme

Court of Appeal or of the High Court;

(b)	the office of Resident Magistrate or Magistrate; and

(c)	such other offices of chairman or member of any court of

law, as may be prescribed by Parliament.

CHAPTER VII Finance

73.	No tax, rate, duty, levy or imposition shall be raised, levied or imposed by or for the purposes of the Government or any local authority otherwise than by or under the authority of law.

74.	All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purposes of the Government shall, subject to this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, be paid into and form one fund, to be known as the Consolidated Fund.

75.	—(1) Subject to subsection (6) no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except—

(a)	to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament; or

(b)	where the issue of those moneys has been authorized by an Appropriation Act, a supplementary Appropriation Act or by an Act made in pursuance of subsection (5) or of sections 80, 81, 82, 83 or 84, or by a resolution of the National Assembly made in accordance with section 79.

(2)	Where any moneys are charged by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament upon the Consolidated Fund, they shall be paid out of that fund by the Minister responsible for Finance to the person or authority to whom payment is due.

(3)	No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except in the manner prescribed by Parliament.

(4)	The investment of moneys forming part of the Consolidated Fund by way of deposit with a bank or with the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations or by way of purchase of trustee securities as defined by an Act of Parliament shall not be regarded as a withdrawal of those moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes of this Constitution.

(5)	Notwithstanding subsection (1), provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament authorizing withdrawals to be made from the Consolidated Fund, in such circumstances and to such extent as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, for the purpose of making advances to persons or authorities other than the Government:

Provided that no moneys shall be advanced from the Consolidated Fund under this subsection save on condition that they are repayable by the person or authority to whom or on behalf of whom they are advanced.

(6)	Subsection (1) does not apply to any such sums as are mentioned in section 77 (3).

76.	—(1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund, in 1

addition to any grant, remuneration or other moneys so charged \ by this Constitution or any other law—	,

(a)	all debt charges for which the Government is liable;

(b)	all pensions, compensation for loss of office and gratuities for which the Government is liable;

(c)	any moneys required to satisfy any judgment, decision or award made or given against the Government by any court or tribunal; and

(d)	all moneys or debt charges charged before the appointed day upon the revenues or public funds of Malawi.

(2) For the purposes of this section, “ debt charges” include interest, sinking fund charges, the repayment or amortization of debt, and all expenditure in connexion with the raising of loans on the security of the Consolidated Fund and the service and redemption of debt thereby created.

77.	—(1) The Minister responsible for Finance shall in respect of every financial year cause to be laid before the National Assembly before the commencement of that financial year a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government in respect of that financial year, other than the sums specified in subsection (3):

Provided that where the National Assembly does not propose to debate the estimates until after the commencement of the financial year to which they relate, the estimates of revenue may be laid before the National Assembly at any time before the commencement of such debate.

(2)	The estimates of expenditure shall show separately—

(a)	the total sums required to meet expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund;

(b)	the sums respectively required to meet the heads of other expenditure proposed to be met from the Consolidated Fund.

(3)	The sums to be shown in the estimates of receipts and expenditure shall not include—

(a)	sums representing the proceeds of any loan raised by the Government for specific purposes and appropriated for those purposes by the Act authorizing the raising of the loan;

(b)	sums representing any money or interest on money received by the Government subject to a trust and to be held or applied in accordance with the terms of that trust;

(c)	sums representing moneys authorized to be advanced from the Consolidated Fund under an Act of Parliament and repayments thereof;

(d)	sums representing moneys received for or to be applied from any special fund established and regulated by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament which provides that subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to that fund.

78.	When the estimates of expenditure to be met from the Consolidated Fund but not charged thereon have been approved by the National Assembly a Bill, to be known as an Appropriation Bill, shall be introduced in the Assembly providing for the

issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums, under separate votes for the several heads of expenditure approved, to the purposes specified in the Bill.

79.	—(1) If in respect of any financial year it is found—

(a)	that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act for any purpose is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Appropriation Act; or

(.b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount (if any) appropriated for that purpose by the Appropriation Act,

a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National Assembly and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a supplementary Appropriation Bill or in a motion or motions approving such expenditure.

(2) Where any supplementary expenditure has been approved in a financial year by a resolution of the National Assembly under subsection (1), a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced in the National Assembly as soon as practicable after the commencement of the financial year next following, providing for the appropriation of the sums so approved.

80.	Parliament may make provision under which, if it appears to the Minister responsible for Finance that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, he may authorize the withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of moneys for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier:

Provided that provision for any moneys so withdrawn shall be included, under the appropriate heads, in the Appropriation Bill.

81.	—(1) Parliament may make provision for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for authorizing the Minister responsible for Finance, if he is satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need.

(2) Where any advance is made from the Contingencies Fund, a supplementary estimate shall, as soon as practicable, be

presented to and voted on by the National Assembly and a supplementary Appropriation Bill or motion approving such expenditure in accordance with section 79 shall be introduced for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced.

82.	—(1) A loan may be raised by the Government under the authority of an Act of Parliament and not otherwise.

(2)	Parliament may, in the Act authorizing the raising of a loan or by any other Act, appropriate the proceeds of the loan for specific purposes and authorize the payment of such proceeds out of the Consolidated Fund for such purposes.

83.	—(1) An Act of Parliament may, subject to section 84, make provision for the creation of special funds which shall be accounted within the accounts of the Consolidated Fund and for the regulation or management of the moneys accounted in such special funds. Such Act may provide that section 77 (1) and (2) shall not apply to any particular special fund.

(2)	Parliament may make provision regulating the manner in which moneys or investments held by Government subject to a trust are to be accounted for.

84.	—(1) There shall be a special fund within the Consolidated Fund to be known as the Development Fund. Receipts and expenditure of the Government relating to the development of the Republic, which have not been included in the annual statement provided for in section 77, shall be accounted in the accounts of the Development Fund. Estimates of such receipts and expenditure shall be submitted by the Minister responsible for Finance to the National Assembly not less than once yearly.

(2)	When the estimates of expenditure to be met from the Development Fund have been approved by the National Assembly, a Bill to be known as an Appropriation (Development Fund) Bill shall be introduced in the National Assembly providing for the issue from the Development Fund and appropriation of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure.

85.	—(1) There shall be an Auditor General who shall be appointed by the President and whose office shall be a public office.

(2)	The public accounts of Malawi shall be audited and reported on by the Auditor General.

(3)	The Auditor General shall perform such other duties and exercise such other powers in relation to the public accounts and to the accounts of other public authorities and bodies as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(4)	The Auditor General shall submit his reports at least once a. year to the Minister responsible for Finance, who shall cause every such report to be laid before the National Assembly not later than the first meeting of the Assembly after he has received the report.

(5)	In the exercise of the functions vested in him by this Constitution, and subject to this Constitution, the Auditor General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

CHAPTER VIII The Public Service

86.—(1) There shall be a Public Service Commission which I shall consist of a Chairman and not less than three nor more than J five other members.

(2)	The members of the Public Service Commission shall be appointed by the President.

(3)	A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Public Service Commission if he is a Minister, a member of the National Assembly or a public officer.

(4)	Subject to this section, the office of a member of the Public Service Commission shall become vacant—

(a)	at the expiration of four years from the date of his

appointment; or

(b)	if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member

of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for

appointment as such.

(5)	A member of the Public Service Commission may be removed from office by the President.

(6)	If the office of Chairman of the Public Service Commission is vacant or if the person holding that office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as may be designated in that behalf by the President.

(7)	If at any time there are less than three members of the Public Service Commission besides the Chairman or if any such member is appointed to act as Chairman* or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment as a member of the Commission to act as a member, and any person so

appointed shall, subject to subsection (4), continue to act until the office in which he is acting is filled or, as the case may be, until the holder thereof resumes his functions or until his appointment to act is revoked by the President.

87.—(1) Subject to this Constitution, power to appoint persons to hold or act in any offices in the public service (including power to confirm appointments), and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the President.

(2)	The President may, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit, delegate any of his powers under this section by directions in writing to the Public Service Commission, or any member thereof or to any public officer.

(3)	The Public Service Commission may be required by the President to advise him in relation to the appointment of persons to hold or act in any office in the public service to which this section applies, the confirmation of such appointments or the removal of any such person from office.

(4)	The Public Service Commission shall, subject to the general or special directions of the President given from time to time and to any regulations made by the Minister under section 95, exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any office to which this section applies.

(5)	The Public Service Commission may, subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, delegate any of its powers under this section (including any powers delegated to it by the President, unless the President shall have otherwise directed) by directions in writing to any member of the Commission or to any public officer.

(6)	This-section shall not apply in relation to any of the following offices—

(a)	the office of any Justice of Appeal or of any Judge;

(b)	the offices of Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor General;

(c)	any office to which section 56 (which relates to the office of the Attorney General), section 72 (which relates to judicial offices), section 89 (which relates to the offices of representatives of the Republic abroad) or section 90 (which relates to the offices of Permanent Secretaries and the office of the Secretary to the Cabinet) applies;

(d)	any appointment in the armed forces; or

(e)	any office in the Malawi Police Force.

(7)	In any case where the President has delegated to the Public Service Commission the power of appointment of the Clerk or

the Clerk-Assistant to the National Assembly, then before exercising any of its powers in relation to the Clerk or Clerk-Assistant of the National Assembly, the Public Service Commission shall consult the Speaker of the Assembly.

88.—(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or to act in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions and to remove from office a person holding or acting in such office shall vest solely in the President.

(2)	[Repealed by 32 of 1968]

89.	Power to appoint persons to hold or to act in the offices of Ambassador, High Commissioner or other principal diplomatic representative of the Republic, and to remove from office persons holding or acting in such offices, shall vest solely in the President.

90.	Power to appoint persons to hold or to act in the offices of Permanent Secretary or the Secretary to the Cabinet, and to remove from office persons holding or acting in such offices, shall vest solely in the President.

91.	There shall be a Police Service Commission, which shall consist of—

(a)	the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, who shall be Chairman of the Commission;

(b)	a judge designated by the President; and

(c)	a member of the Public Service Commission, other than the Chairman, designated by the President.

92.	Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the office of Commissioner of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police shall vest solely in the President.

93.	Subject to section 92, section 87 (1) to (5) inclusive (which relate to the appointment of public officers) shall apply in relation to the appointment of police officers with the following modifications—

(a)	for the expression “offices in the public service.” there shall be substituted the expression “offices in the Malawi Police Force”;

(b)	for the expression “the Public Service Commission” there shall be substituted the expression “the Police Service Commission”; and

(c)	for the expression “public officer” there shall be substituted the expression “police officer”.

94.	Parliament may make provision constituting acts or omissions by members of the Malawi Police Force as offences against police force discipline, and prescribing the punishment that may be imposed for any such offence. The powers of the Police Service Commission and of any officer of the Malawi Police Force by or under section 93, with respect to disciplinary control and removal from office of members of the Police Force, shall be exercised in accordance with any such provision and with any regulations made by the Minister under section 95.

95.	—(1) The Minister for the time being responsible for the Public Service may, subject to this Constitution, make regulations for the administration, regulation and disciplinary control of the public service and for matters incidental thereto.

(2) Without derogation from the generality of subsection (1), any such regulations may make provision for—

(a)	the terms and conditions of service of public officers; and

(b)	the performance of the functions of any appropriate Service Commission and the forms and procedures to be followed by those Commissions in the exercise of their functions, or by any persons to whom those functions, may have lawfully been delegated.

CHAPTER IX Miscellaneous

96.	—(1) Any person who is appointed or elected to any office established by or under this Constitution may resign from that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed or elected:

Provided that in the case of a person who holds the office of President, Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly his resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Assembly, and in the case of a member of the Assembly his resignation shall be addressed to the Speaker.

97.	—(1) Subject to this section, Parliament may amend this Constitution.

(2)	A Bill introduced into the National Assembly under this section shall not be passed unless—

(a)	the Bill is in its title expressed to be an Act to amend the Constitution; and

(b)	the Bill is supported on the second and third readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the National Assembly.

98.	—(1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires—

“Act of Parliament” means any law made by Parliament, either before or after the appointed day, and includes any existing law continued in force by section 5 of the Republic of Malawi (Constitution) Act;

“appointed day” means the 6th day of July, 1966;

“appropriate Service Commission” means, as the context or circumstances of the case may require, the Public Service Commission, the Judicial Service Commission or the Police Service Commission, provided for in this Constitution; “armed forces” means the armed forces of the Republic; “Committee of Appointment” means the Committee of Appointment referred to in section 14;

“Consolidated Fund” means the Consolidated Fund established by section 74;

“Contingencies Fund” means the Contingencies Fund referred to in section 81;

“Electoral College” means the Electoral College established by section 11;

“Electoral Commission” means the Electoral Commission established by section 30;

“the Government” means the authority, for the time being, in which is vested the executive power of the Republic;

“judge” means a judge of the High Court and includes the Chief Justice;

“Minister” means a Minister of the Government appointed by the President under section 49 or 50 and includes the President when he is himself exercising the functions of a Minister under this Constitution;

“the National Assembly” means the National Assembly constituted under section 19, and the expression “the Assembly” shall be construed accordingly;

“the Party” means the Malawi Congress Party;

“pensions benefits” means any pensions, compensations, gratuities or other like allowances conferred on persons in respect of their service as public officers, or provided for the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service;

“Presidential Commission” means a Presidential Commission appointed under section 15;

“Presidential Council” means a Presidential Council constituted under section 13;

“public office” means an office of emolument in the public service;

“public officer” means a person holding or acting in any public office;

“public service” means, subject to subsections (2) and (3), the service of the Government in a civil capacity;

“Republic” means the Republic of Malawi;

“Secretary-General” means the person who is for the time being lawfully discharging the functions of Secretary-General of the Party;

“session” means the sittings of the National Assembly beginning when it first sits after the appointed day, or after its prorogation or dissolution at any time, and ending when it is prorogued, or is dissolved without having been prorogued;

“sitting” means a period during which the National Assembly is sitting without adjournment, and includes any period during which it is in committee;

“subordinate court” means any court established for the Republic other than—

(a)	the Supreme Court of Appeal;

(b)	the High Court; or

(c)	a court-martial;

“terminal benefits” means any benefits, allowances or privileges conferred on any public officer by the Government on the termination of his service or employment;

“Traditional Court” means a court established by or under the Traditional Courts Act.

(2) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, references to offices in the public service shall be construed as including references to the office of Justices of Appeal and Judges and to the office of Magistrate, and to the offices of members of the Malawi Police Force, being offices the emoluments attaching to which are paid directly out of moneys provided by Parliament.

(3)	In this Constitution, reference to an office in the public service shall not be construed as including references to the office of the President, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, any Minister or Parliamentary Secretary, a member of the Assembly, a member of any Commission established by this Constitution or a Chief or Sub-Chief.

(4)	For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered as holding a public office by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service under the Government.

SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION POLICE REGULATIONS

ARRANGEMENT OF REGULATIONS

PART I Preliminary

REGULATION

1.	Citation

2.	Application

3.	Interpretation

4.	Delegation by Commissioner of powers and duties as responsible

officer

5.	Duties and liabilities of police officers

PART II Career Procedure

6.	Appointments

7.	Requirements of applicant for enlistment as constable

8.	Provision in annual estimates

9.	Application for enlistment

10.	Period of enlistment of constable

11.	Declaration on enlistment or re-enlistment

12.	Recruitment and training

13.	Re-enlistment

14.	Conditions of re-enlistment

15.	Confirmation in appointment

16.	Entry points

17.	Incremental credit

18.	Date of appointment and commencement of salary

19.	Personal file

20.	Acting appointments

21.	Dismissals and convictions

22.	Incremental posts

23.	Incremental date

24.	Requisite conditions and increment certificate

25.	Withholding of increment

26.	Stoppage of increment

27.	Granting of increments

28.	Efficiency bars

29.	Adjustment of efficiency bar

30.	Duties of responsible officers in relation to efficiency bars

31.	Tests, qualifications or conditions

32.	Failure to pass

33.	Police examinations

34.	Transport allowance

35.	Failure to pass examination

36.	Exemptions

37.	Transfer

REGULATION

38.	Posting

39.	Procedure for promotion and transfer

40.	Seniority upon promotion

41. Appointment to fixed salary

42. Appointment to salary scale segment

43.	Notification

44.	Resignation and notice of resignation

45.	Due notice

46.	Retirement

47.	Privileges on retirement

48.	Discharge of officers of junior rank

49.	Extension of service

50.	Terminal benefits

51.	Dismissal

52.	Refunds to Government

53.	Recovery of funds and debts

54.	Certificates, testimonials and references

55.	Deaths

56.	Gazette notifications

PART III

Salaries and Educational Qualifications

57.	Salaries and salary scale segments

58.	Educational qualifications

PART IV Holidays and Sick Leave

59.	Holiday not a right

60.	Annual holiday periods

61.	No additional traveling time or accumulation of holidays

62.	Duties and powers of responsible officers in respect of holidays

63.	Change in period of holiday

64.	Incomplete holiday year

65.	Salary during holiday

66.	Leaving and dismissal

67.	Course of instruction outside Malawi

68.	Holiday grant

69.	Change in holiday grant and incomplete holiday year

70.	Transpct warraUs in lieu of holiday grant

71.	Entitlement on resignation, leaving and dismissal

72.	Sick leave

73.	Unpaid personal leave

74.	Record of service

75.	Unauthorised absence

PART V Housing and Uniforms

76.	Interpretation

77.	Entitlement abd responsibilities

78.	Classes

REGULATION

79.	Rents

80.	Sub-standard quarters

81.	Water appliances, electricity, etc.

82.	Payment of rent

83.	Nature of tenancy

84.	Use of institutional quarters

85.	Sharing of quarters

86.	Alteration and maintenance

87.	Inventory of furniture

88.	Default and damage

89.	Uniforms

PART VI Advances and Allowances

90.	Advance of salary not a right

91.	Authorization of advance

92.	Factors to be considered in exercising discretion

93.	Security

94.	Agreement for repayment

95.	Interest

96.	Rate of repayment

97.	Deduction from salary or terminal benefit

98.	Education advance

99.	Prohibited advance

100.	Approval of institution and course

101.	Additional factors to be considered

102.	Application procedure for education advance

103.	Agreement, payment, repayment and interest—education

advance

104.	Emergency advance

105.	Usual terms

106.	Exceptional terms

107.	Application procedure for emergency advance

108.	Agreement—emergency advance

109.	Bicycle advance

110.	Frequency

111.	Amount

112.	Payment

113.	Repayment

114.	Application procedure and agreement—bicycle advance

115.	Motor vehicle advance

116.	Limits on motor vehicle advances

117.	Second-hand vehicles

118.	Accident or mechanical breakdown

119.	Advance not to exceed actual cost

120.	Interest

121.	Repayment

122.	Possession by responsible officer

123.	Application procedure—motor vehicle advance

124.	Duties of responsible officer

125.	Removal of vehicle from Malawi

REGULATION

126.	Insurance requirement

127.	Use of vehicle

128.	Bicycle mileage allowance

129.	Commuted rates

130.	Honour certificate

131.	Motor vehicle mileage allowance

132.	Specialized vehicles

133.	Claims

134.	General provisions

135.	Commuted motor vehicle mileage allowance

136.	House to office mileage allowance

137.	Payment

138.	Rates

139.	Transport and baggage allowances—traveling within Malawi

140.	Class of transport and baggage allowance

141.	Private motor vehicle

142.	Air

143.	Traveling outside Malawi—air

144.	Rail travel outside Malawi

145.	Private motor vehicle—travel outside Malawi

146.	Subsistence allowances—traveling within Malawi on duty

147.	Accommodation charges—senior ranks

148.	Allowances for meals

149.	Miscellaneous expenses

150.	Caravan and camp

151.	No subsistence when hospitality allowance payable

152.	Subsistence allowance—traveling within Malawi in other

circumstances

153.	Use of own motor vehicle

154.	No subsistence when hospitality allowance payable

155.	Subsistence allowance—traveling outside Malawi as represent-

ative

156.	Other subsistence rates

157.	Subsistence rates for foreign travel

158.	Subsistence rates—traveling outside Malawi with family

159.	Use of own motor vehicle for travel outside Malawi

160.	Exception—lake anchorages

161.	Course of training, etc., abroad

162.	Short courses

163.	Courses within Malawi—officers of junior rank

164.	Hospitality allowances

165.	Occasional meals

166.	Claims

167.	Other police officers

168.	Local transfer allowances

169.	Rates

170.	Uniform and clothing allowances—senior ranks

171.	Uniform and clothing allowances—junior ranks

172.	Efficiency allowances—constables

173.	Duty allowances—officers of junior rank

L.R

REGULATION

174.	Interpretation

175.	Application

176.	Pensionable posts

177.	Qualifying service

178.	Continuity of service

179.	Salary

180.	Terminal benefits subject to disciplinary control, and payment

of debts due to Government

181.	Terminal benefits not assignable

182.	Applications for terminal benefits

183.	Eligibility for pension

184.	Rate of pension

185.	Pensionable service

186.	Pensionable salary

187.	Options

188.	Suspension of pension

189.	Duration of pension

190.	Eligibility for gratuity

191.	Amount of gratuity

192.	Service on 1st January, 1951

193.	Transferred police officers—interpretation and application

194.	Pension

195.	Gratuity

POLICE REGULATIONS

made under s. 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Malawi

PART I Preliminary

1.	These Regulations may be cited as the Police Regulations.

2.	—(1) Save as expressly provided in sub-regulation (2)—

(a)	these Regulations shall apply to every police officer; and

(b)	the Malawi Public Service Regulations shall not apply.

(2) (a) A police officer designated by the Ministry of Overseas Development of the United Kingdom for the purposes of that country’s Overseas Service Aid Scheme or for British Aided Conditions of Service (hereinafter referred to as an expatriate police officer) shall hold his appointment on the terms and conditions set out in any contract between himself and the Government and shall be subject to the provisions of Book Five of the Malawi Public Service Regulations.

Police Regulations

(b) Save where expressly provided these Regulations shall1' apply to an expatriate police officer in respect of all matters not regulated under paragraph (a).

3.	In these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—

“accounting officer” means the police officer specified in the Estimates as being responsible for the expenditure of public money under the Police Vote;

“appointment” includes re-appointment, acting appointment, promotion and transfer;

“appropriate authority” means in relation to any police officer, the authority or person responsible for the appointment, conditions of service or discipline of that police officer in accordance with any relevant legislation;

“Commissioner” means Commissioner of Police;

“Estimates” means the estimates of expenditure referred to in section 77 of the Constitution;

“expatriate officer” has the meaning assigned thereto in regulation 2;

“fixed salary” means the salary attached to any post in the Force to which no salary scale segment is attached;

“form” means a form approved by the Commissioner; “increment” means a specified annual increase in salary in a salary scale set out in Part III;

“misconduct” in relation to police officers of senior rank means conduct which in the view of the appropriate authority is unbecoming of such officers, and in relation to police officers of junior rank means an offence against discipline under section 39 of the Police Act;

“pay officer” means the police officer responsible for salary change advices or salary vouchers in respect of any other police officer;

“posting” means the assignment of a police officer to a different post of the same rank within the Force;

“promotion” means the conferment on a police officer of a higher rank than his last substantive rank;

“police officer” shall have the meaning attached to such expression in the Police Act;

“responsible officer” in relation to the Commissioner means the Permanent Secretary and in relation to any other police officer means the Commissioner or the police officer to whom the Commissioner has delegated his powers as responsible officer under regulation 4;

“salary scale segment” means that portion of any salary scale which is attached to a particular post and which is subject to annual increase by way of increment;

“seniority” has the meaning attached to it by regulation 2 of the Police Service Commission Regulations;

“terminal benefit” means a benefit, allowance or privilege conferred on an officer on the termination of his service with the Force;

“transfer” means the permanent transfer of a police officer to a public office outside the Force;

“vacancy” means vacancy in a post for which full, as opposed to token, financial provision is made in the Estimates.

4.	The Commissioner may delegate the exercise of his powers and duties under these Regulations as responsible officer in respect of any police officer to any other police officer of higher rank than that police officer.

5.	Compliance with all relevant written laws, Treasury Instructions, Force Standing Orders and Force Orders shall be deemed to be part of the terms and conditions of service of every police officer.

PART II

Career Procedure

6.	Every police officer shall, unless the appropriate authority directs or recommends otherwise, be enlisted into the Force initially as a constable.

7.	An application for enlistment as a constable must—

(a)	be over 18 and under 26 years of age;

(b)	be at least 5 feet 6 inches in height, without footwear;

(c)	have a minimum chest measurement of 32 inches (deflated);

(d)	be at least 125 lb. in weight;

(e)	be medically examined and passed as physically fit for service by a Government medical officer;

(f)	be intelligent and of good physique;

(g)	not have been convicted of any criminal offence;

(h)	be of not less than standard 8 education, but preferably of a higher standard; and

(/) have normal vision without the use of spectacles.

8.	No appointment of any kind to a post in the Force may be made unless that post has been provided for in the Estimates:

Provided that in an exceptional case, and with the prior approval of the Permanent Secretary, an appointment may be made to a post not provided for against a vacancy in a post of a higher grade.

9.	—(1) An applicant for enlistment in the Force shall complete a form of application.

(2) An applicant for enlistment in the Force who knowingly gives a false answer to any question or makes a false statement in any such form of application shall be liable to a fine of £25 or to imprisonment for three months.

10.	—(1) Every constable shall be enlisted to serve in the Force for a period of four years on first engagement; such period shall be reckoned from the day on which a constable makes his declaration as required under regulation 11.

(2)	Every officer who has completed such period of four years may, with the approval of the Commissioner re-enlist for continuous service.

(3)	Any police officer whose preliminary period of service expires during a state of war, insurrection or other cause for which his continued services are required may be retained for such further period not exceeding one year as the Commissioner may decide, before being granted his discharge.

11.	—(1) Every officer who is enlisted or re-enlisted in the Force shall, on such enlistment or re-enlistment make a declaration in the following form—

“I, A.B., do solemnly and sincerely declare and promise that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Malawi, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of Malawi as by law established, and will obey all orders of the President and of the officers placed over me, and subject myself to all Acts, Rules and Regulations relating to the Police now in force, or which may from time to time be in force, during my service.”.

(2) Such declaration shall be made by the police officer before a magistrate, or police officer of or above the rank of Assistant Superintendent, and shall be made in his own language.

12.	—(1) The training of the Force is regarded as falling into two classes, namely—

(a)	recruit training which shall be given by the Police Training

School;

(b)	post recruit training which shall be given to a police officer

at his station.

13.	—(1) Two months prior to completion of his initial period of engagement every police officer shall be interviewed by his responsible officer and asked if he desires to re-enlist for continuous

service.

(2)	If a police officer wishes to re-enlist the conditions of reenlistment for continuous service shall be carefully explained. He shall then be medically examined and a medical report made by a Government medical officer. The responsible officer will then make his recommendation to the police officer in charge of the division who will approve or not approve the re-enlistment. When re-enlistment is effected Force Headquarters shall be advised for publication in Force Orders.

(3)	In the event of a responsible officer not wishing to recommend re-enlistment of a police officer on account of unsatisfactory work or conduct he shall report the fact to the police officer in charge of the division for instructions, before the police officer is medically examined but after he has been asked in terms of sub-regulation (2) if he wishes to re-enlist.

(4)	In the event of an officer wishing to re-enlist and the police officer in charge of the division not recommending re-enlistment Force Headquarters shall be informed before action is taken to discharge the police officer.

(5)	In the case of specialist branches, the police officer in charge of the division shall make his recommendations to the Officer-in-Charge of the Headquarters Branch concerned, who will approve or not approve the re-enlistment.

14.	Any police officer of junior rank who re-enlists within three months of the date of completing any previous period of service shall on re-enlistment be entitled to the advantages to which he was entitled with regard to previous service, rank and pay. The service of such a police officer who re-enlists under tin's regulation shall be deemed to be continuous for the purpose of his pension and gratuity unless he has been paid a gratuity in respect of his previous service, in which case, provided he repays his gratuity within a period to be fixed by the Commissioner, his service shall be deemed to be continuous. Every such officer shall be placed in such rank or grade as the Commissioner may determine.

15.	A police officer who has re-enlisted for continuous service shall be deemed to be confirmed in his appointment. Such an officer may be retired, discharged or dismissed from the Force on the directions of the appropriate authority.

16.	The salary payable to a police officer on first appointment shall be the minimum salary of the salary scale segment applicable to the post to which he is appointed, except where he qualifies for any other entry point under the provisions of these Regulations.

17.	A constable on first appointment may enter the salary scale at a total maximum of six increments above the minimum in respect of previous service in another police force, or previous experience which is likely to be of use to the constable in the post in the Force to which he is to be appointed, or both. Such incremental credit shall be assessed as follows—

(a)	one increment for each completed year of service in another police force to a maximum of five increments provided that the constable enlists in the Force within one year of the termination of his last police appointment;

(b)	one increment up to a maximum of three, for each completed year of previous experience which is likely to be of use to the constable in the post in the Force to which he is to be appointed. Military service as an armourer, bugler, driver or signaller shall be regarded as such experience in the case of a constable who has served in such a post in a military force and who is to be appointed to such a post in the Police Force:

Provided that—

(i)	academic qualifications in excess of the minimum required for enlistment shall in no case make a constable eligible for incremental credit under this regulation; and

(ii)	a constable who is granted incremental credit in accordance with this regulation shall not be entitled to carry such incremental credit forward on promotion.

18.	-—(1) A police officer’s date of appointment to any post shall be the date on which he first reports for duty in that post.

(2)	A police officer’s salary shall commence from the date of his appointment.

19.	Every responsible officer shall maintain a personal file in respect of every police officer for whom he is responsible. Every personal file must contain, amongst other documents, a copy of the police officer’s application form, letter of appointment and record of service.

20.	—(1) If a post of police officer of senior rank has functions , which by law or regulation may be performed only by a police '• officer appointed to hold or act in the post and the functions of 1 the post cannot be fulfilled because the post is vacant or the holder of the post, is for any reason unable to perform the functions of the post the responsible officer—

(a)	may appoint a police officer to act in that post for such period as may have been laid down by the appropriate authority;

(b)	shall make to the appropriate authority such report and recommendation as is required by the authority regarding any acting appointment which he considers desirable;

(c)	shall approve or disapprove the payment of an acting allowance to the officer for the duration of his appointment to act in that post.

(2)	A police officer so appointed to act in a post shall continue to be held against the personal emoluments item for the post which he substantively holds.

(3)	(a) Where a responsible officer approves the payment of an acting allowance to a police officer appointed to act in a post, the allowance shall be calculated as follows—

(i)	if the post in which the officer acts carries a fixed salary, the allowance shall be 50 per cent, of the difference between the officer’s basic substantive salary and the basic substantive salary attached to the post in which he acts;

(ii)	if the post in which the officer acts carries an incremental scale, the allowance shall be 50 per cent, of the difference between the officer’s basic substantive salary and the minimum basic salary for the post in which he acts.

(b)	An acting allowance shall be non-pensionable but shall otherwise be reckonable for all benefits and charges which are tied to salary such as subsistence allowance, rent or taxation.

(4)	Where in the interests of localization a supernumerary post has been created and a police officer is appointed to act in such post, such officer may be paid an acting allowance in accordance with subregulation (3).

(5)	An appointment under this regulation may be notified in accordance with regulation 56 and no acting allowance shall be paid unless the appointment is so notified.

21.	Except with the prior written approval of the Minister, communicated to the appropriate authority, no person who has been dismissed from the Force or convicted, whether in Malawi or elsewhere, of a criminal offence of a nature which would warrant disciplinary proceedings under these Regulations, may be appointed to the Force.

22.	The regulations relating to increments shall apply only to police officers appointed to posts to which are attached salary scale segments providing for annual increases in salary.

23.	Except where otherwise specifically provided, a police officer’s incremental date shall, in every year after the year in which he was appointed, be the first day of the month during which he was first appointed.

24.	—(1) An increment shall be granted on the basis that a police officer has shown the requisite efficiency, diligence and fidelity in the discharge of the duties of his post. A failure to fulfill these requisite conditions shall be a ground for the withholding or stoppage of increments. Where a responsible officer

considers that a police officer has not fulfilled these requisite conditions, he shall carry out the procedure laid down by the appropriate authority.

(2)	In the case of a police officer whose increment is conditional upon his passing an examination or otherwise no increment may be granted until the responsible officer is satisfied that all the requisite qualifications and conditions have been fulfilled.

(3)	In the case of a police officer whose increment is conditional upon his passing an efficiency bar, no increment may be granted until the appropriate authority directs that the police officer has passed the efficiency bar.

(4)	The responsible officer shall ensure that the police officer’s pay officer is informed in good time whenever an increment will not be granted in any year.

25.—(1) The withholding of an increment means that a police officer not having qualified for an increment on the date on which it is due, cannot receive his increment until he has fulfilled the necessary conditions to qualify therefor.

(2)	An increment shall be withheld—

(a)	when the necessary examinations have not been passed, or exemption obtained;

(b)	where approval has not been obtained from the appropriate authority for the passing of an efficiency bar;

(c)	on the direction of the appropriate authority, as a punishment.

(3)	The withholding of an increment under subregulation (2) (a) shall continue until the responsible officer authorizes payment, and the responsible officer shall indicate, subject to regulation 35 whether—

(a)	the withheld increment shall be paid for a period of twelve months and the police officer’s incremental date be altered accordingly;

(b)	the withheld increment shall be paid until the police officer’s next normal incremental date when he will become eligible for a further increment; or

(c)	the withheld increment shall be paid with retrospective effect as from the date when it was first due.

(4)	The withholding of an increment under subregulation (2) 0b) and (c) shall continue until such time as the appropriate authority directs that the next increment shall be paid.

(5)	Where twelve months or more elapse between the withholding of a police officer’s increment and the payment of his next increment, the police officer shall ordinarily be granted only one increment in accordance with subregulations (3) and (4).

26.	—(1) The stoppage of an increment means that a police officer cannot be considered for the grant of his next increment until another incremental year has elapsed and the police officer has served for two years at the same salary.

(2)	The stoppage of an increment may only be directed as a punishment by the appropriate authority.

(3)	An increment which has been stopped may not be restored.

27.	Except as otherwise provided in this Part, upon a police officer’s incremental date the pay officer shall commence payment to a police officer of a salary at a level one increment above the previous rate of salary until the maximum of the salary scale segment for the grade is reached.

28.	—(1) Efficiency bars are designed to ensure that a police officer does not continue to receive increments in a long salary scale segment unless he has passed any prescribed examinations and acquired additional qualities which will enable him to perform efficiently the duties and responsibilities of an officer in the higher portions of that salary scale segment.

(2)	Efficiency bars are indicated by the mark “(EB)” in the salary scale segment attached to grades as set forth in regulation 57. Where an efficiency bar occurs at a particular point in the salary scale segment the efficiency bar is between that point and the next higher point in that salary scale segment.

(3)	A police officer becomes due to pass the efficiency bar when he has received for one year the salary at the point in the salary scale segment where the efficiency bar occurs.

(4)	No increment beyond an efficiency bar shall be granted to a police officer until the appropriate authority directs that he has passed the efficiency bar.

29.	Where a salary scale segment contains an efficiency bar and a police officer enters the scale at a point below an efficiency bar which would cause him to reach the efficiency bar before the completion of four years’ service the position of the efficiency bar shall be adjusted so that the police officer shall be due to pass the efficiency bar on completion of four years’ service. Where a police officer enters at a point above an efficiency bar he will be considered to have passed that efficiency bar.

30.	—(1) Where a police officer is due to pass an efficiency bar his responsible officer shall forward to the appropriate authority a recommendation as to whether or not the police officer should pass the bar.

(2) In making such recommendation the responsible officer shall give effect to the general policy set out in regulation 28.

(3)	When the appropriate authority has so directed, the responsible officer shall authorize payment to the police officer of the first increment beyond the efficiency bar.

31.	A responsible officer may prescribe that a specified test, qualification or condition is to be passed, acquired or fulfilled before the passing of an efficiency bar by a police officer, provided that such test, qualification or condition has been approved by the appropriate authority.

32.	Where the appropriate authority decides that a police officer has failed to pass an efficiency bar when due to do so, the police officer shall, unless the appropriate authority specifically otherwise directs—

(a)	forfeit permanently any increase in salary which he would otherwise have received during the period between the date on which he should have passed the efficiency bar and the date on which he in fact does so and his incremental date shall in subsequent years be the first day of the month in which he passes the efficiency bar; and

(b)	permanently lose seniority in respect of the period referred to in paragraph (a).

33.	—(1) Save where the Commissioner otherwise provides, a police officer of senior rank shall within two years of his appointment to that rank be required to pass—

(a)	Parts II and III of the Civil Service Law Examination, hereinafter referred to as the Law Examination, and

(b)	the Police Examination.

(2)	The subjects of the Police Examination shall be—

(a)	the Police Act and all subsidiary legislation made thereunder;

(b)	Police Standing Orders, general principles of police practice and procedure and the investigation of crime; and

(c)	such other subjects as may from time to time be prescribed by the Commissioner.

(3)	The Police Examination shall be held at such times and subject to such conditions as the Commissioner may from time to time direct.

34.	A police officer who attends a Law Examination shall be deemed to do so on duty for the purpose of payment of transport, or mileage allowance, and subsistence and other allowances on the occasion of first presenting himself for examination in a required part:

Provided that a police officer shall not qualify more than twice for attending examinations on duty.

35.	—(1) Where a police officer fails to pass all the required parts of the examinations within the period prescribed, he shall not be eligible for any promotion or increment until he has passed all the required parts.

(2)	On passing all the required parts of the examinations any increments withheld under subregulation (1) shall be paid with effect from the first day of the month following that in which the examination was passed without change of incremental date:

Provided that a responsible officer may, if he is satisfied that delay in passing the examinations was due to illness, accident or other cause not arising from the fault of the police officer, direct that an increment withheld under subregulation (1) be granted with retrospective effect as from the date when it was first due.

(3)	Where failure to pass the Law Examination or the Police Examination results in failure to pass an efficiency bar, the penalties in connexion with the latter may be imposed in addition to the penalties in connexion with the former.

36.	A police officer shall on application to his responsible officer be exempted from the requirement to pass the Law Examination—

(a)	where he is qualified to apply for admission to practice as a legal practitioner under the Legal Education and Legal Practitioners Act;

(b)	where he would have qualified as specified in paragraph

(a)	but for the fact that he has not passed the Malawi Law Examination under the said Act, he shall be exempted from the requirement of passing Part II of the said examination;

(c)	where he has passed a law examination in connexion with a course of study at the Institute of Public Administration he may be exempted from those parts of the examination which, in the opinion of that Institute, are substantially similar to the examination so passed by him; or

(id) where he has passed any other law examination which, in the opinion of the Institute of Public Administration, is of equivalent standard.

37.	Where it is proposed by a responsible officer that a police officer be recommended to the appropriate authority for transfer the police officer shall be notified in writing before the recommendation is made, and shall be given an opportunity to make representations to the appropriate authority. Any such representations shall be forwarded to the appropriate authority through his responsible officer, who may send therewith his comments thereon.

38.	The posting of a police officer may be made by his responsible officer without reference to the appropriate authority.

39.	—(1) Where the appropriate authority has directed that a F

police officer be promoted,	£

(a)	if the officer holds or is promoted to senior rank, a letter a of promotion shall be issued to him by his responsible officer * who shall send copies of the letter to the Accountant General, the Auditor General, the appropriate pay officer and the appropriate authority;

(b)	if the officer holds junior rank, and is not being promoted to senior rank, his responsible officer shall arrange for publication of the promotion in Force Orders.

(2) Where the appropriate authority has directed that a police officer of any rank be transferred to a post in the public service outside the Force, the officer’s responsible officer shall issue to him a letter of transfer and shall send copies thereof to the Accountant General, the Auditor General, the appropriate pay officer and the appropriate authority.

40.	For the purpose of establishing a police officer’s seniority, i he shall be deemed to have entered his rank on the date of his ' appointment to the rank as shown in his letter of promotion or by publication in Force Orders, as the case may be.

41.	Where a police officer is appointed to a post to which is . attached a fixed salary, he shall be paid that fixed salary with \ effect from the date of his appointment.

42.	Where a police officer is appointed to a post to which is attached a salary scale segment, his salary and incremental date in that post shall be determined as follows—

(a)	if before promotion the police officer’s salary is less than the minimum of his salary scale segment after promotion, he shall be paid that minimum salary with effect from the date of promotion, and his new incremental date shall in subsequent years be the first day of the month during which he was promoted;

(b)	if before promotion the police officer’s salary is equal to any point in the salary scale segment which he enters on promotion, he shall enter the new salary scale segment at the point one increment above his old salary and his incremental date shall remain unchanged.

43.	Every promotion or transfer shall be notified in accordance with regulation 56.

44.	—(1) No police officer may resign from the Force without giving due notice in writing to his responsible officer. In the case of a police officer of junior rank the express permission of the Commissioner must be obtained before resignation can take place. In this regulation “due notice” means 90 days’ notice, which shall not include any period of leave.

(2)	Instead of giving due notice a police officer may give shorter notice of resignation and pay to the Government three months’ salary if he gives written notice of less than 30 days, two months’ salary if he gives written notice of at least 30 but less than 60 days or one month’s salary if he gives written notice of at least 60 but less than 90 days, to his responsible officer.

(3)	In the case of an officer of junior rank, the Commissioner may in his discretion waive, in whole or in part, the requirements as to notice laid down by this regulation and grant the officer a discharge on such conditions as to repayment of salary as he thinks fit.

45.	—(1) A police officer of senior rank shall not have his appointment terminated, or be retired from the Force, without being given notice in writing by his responsible officer on the direction of the appropriate authority.

(2)	For the purposes of this regulation “due notice” means notice of the length of the period specified in his case in regulation 44.

(3)	In any case where a police officer is entitled under the provisions of this regulation to receive due notice, the Government may instead of giving him due notice pay to him a sum equal to three months’ salary if he receives less than 30 days’ written notice, two months’ salary if he receives at least 30 but less than 60 days’ written notice, or one month’s salary if he receives at least 60 days but less than 90 days’ written notice.

46.	—(1) Unless the appropriate authority directs that his period of service be extended, every police officer shall retire from the Force on attaining the age of 55 years:

Provided that if on attaining that age he has not completed 10 years’ service, he shall retire on completion of 10 years’ service.

(2)	A police officer may voluntarily retire from the Force—

(a)	where he is suffering from infirmity of mind or body which interferes with the performance of the duties of his office;

(b)	where he has both attained the age of 45 years and completed 10 years’ service; or

(c)	where he has completed 25 years’ service.

(3)	A police officer may be required to retire from the Force—

(a)	on medical grounds;

(b)	in case of redundancy;

(c)	if the post which he holds is abolished;

(d)	in the public interest, where the appropriate authority so directs;

(e)	on grounds of incompetence or inefficiency which in the opinion of the appropriate authority is beyond his control;

(/) if he has completed 25 years’ service;

(g)	if he has completed 10 years’ service and has reached the age of 45 years; or

(h)	because the reorganization of the Force makes such retirement desirable in the interests of efficiency or economy.

47.	A police officer who—

(a)	is required to retire under regulation 46; or

(b)	resigns after giving due notice and who has completed two years’ service from the date of recruitment or has completed two years’ service from the date of returning to duty from his last annual holiday, shall be eligible for annual holiday, and transport privileges in accordance with these Regulations. The Commissioner may in addition to or instead of waiving the requirements as to due notice in accordance with regulation 45 waive the service of two years from the date of recruitment or from the date of returning to duty from annual holiday.

48.	A police officer of junior rank may be discharged by the Commissioner at any time—

(a)	when pronounced by a Government medical officer to be physically unfit for further service, such unfitness being occasioned by his own default;

(b)	on the grounds of inefficiency;

(c)	if within two years of his original enlistment the Commissioner considers that he is unlikely to become an efficient police officer.

49.	—(1) A police officer may, not less than three months prior to his reaching the limit for retirement specified in regulation 46, apply to his responsible officer for permission to continue his service for a further period not exceeding five years.

(2)	Not less than three months before the expiration of any extended period of service the police officer may apply to his responsible officer for further extension for periods not exceeding two years at any one time.

(3)	Upon receipt of any such application under subregulation

(1)	or (2) the responsible officer shall require the applicant to submit to an examination by a Government medical officer and shall obtain a report as to whether the applicant is physically and mentally fit to discharge adequately the duties of his post. The responsible officer shall then forward the application and report to the appropriate authority in accordance with its regulations.

(4)	A police officer of junior rank whose period of service expires during a state of war, insurrection or other cause for which his services are required may be retained for such further period not exceeding one year as the Commissioner may order before being granted his discharge.

50.	—(1) A police officer who retires from the Force shall be granted all the terminal benefits for which he is eligible under these Regulations.

(2)	Where a police officer resigns from the Force before qualifying for retirement under regulation 46, he shall forfeit all terminal benefits to which he might otherwise be eligible under these Regulations:

Provided that in any such case the police officer shall be entitled to the benefit of any period of accrued holiday other than payment of any holiday grant, and the appropriate certificate in terms of regulation 54.

51.	A police officer may, on the recommendation of his responsible officer and the direction of the appropriate authority, be dismissed, without due notice, at any time on the grounds of his having committed an act of misconduct. A police officer so dismissed shall forfeit any annual holiday for which he has qualified and all the terminal benefits to which he might otherwise have been entitled under Part YII:

Provided that the Minister may, on the recommendation of the appropriate authority direct that a police officer shall, on dismissal, be granted any part or the whole of the terminal benefits to which he would have been entitled had he retired from the Force on the date of his dismissal.

52.	—(1) A police officer who fails to take up a post to which he is appointed, or who is dismissed, or who resigns from the-Force for any reason other than ill health, not caused by his own impropriety of conduct or neglect, before he has completed the initial period of service, may be required by the appropriate authority to make the following refunds to the Government in whole or in part—

(a)	any payments made to him or on his behalf in connexion with the transportation of himself and his family from his home to his first place of duty and any other allowances paid to him in respect of his appointment; and

(b)	any payment made to him or on his behalf in connexion with any course of instruction.

(2) A police officer serving his initial period whose appointment is terminated by the Commissioner otherwise than by dismissal shall not be liable for any refund under this regulation.

53.	—(1) Where a responsible officer is notified that the retirement or resignation of a police officer under his control is anticipated or that steps have been instituted towards the termination of his service in any manner, that responsible officer shall

ensure that all proper steps are taken to obtain payment prior to his departure of all refunds and debts which may be due to the Government by the police officer.

(2) Any refund or debt due to the Government under subregulation (1) may be wholly or partially satisfied by deduction from any salary, terminal benefit or other moneys due and payable to the police officer by the Government.

54.	—(1) Every police officer who retires or resigns from the Force shall, if he holds senior rank, be granted a certificate of service, or if he holds junior rank a discharge certificate, in the appropriate form. In either case the certificate must be signed by the appropriate responsible officer.

(2) No police officer shall give any testimonial, commendatory letter or certificate of character directly to any other police officer or former police officer. A police officer on leaving the Force or a former police officer may give to a prospective employer the name of another police officer, under whom he served, as a personal referee. A police officer must obtain the prior permission of any such personal referee before so naming him. The police officer so named may, on receipt of an enquiry from the prospective employer, furnish a personal and confidential opinion, and may stipulate that his report shall not be communicated to the candidate.

55.	Upon the death of any police officer his responsible officer must be notified immediately, if necessary by telegram. Upon such notification, the responsible officer shall ensure that—

(a)	the next of kin are notified;

(b)	the necessary accounting arrangements are made in conformity with Treasury instructions;

(c)	so far as it appears to him necessary steps are taken to secure the cash and personal effects of the deceased police officer and dispose of it in accordance with section 58 of die Act;

(d)	application is made under the Workmen’s Compensation Act when appropriate.

56.	—(1) The responsible officer concerned shall cause to be published in the Gazette, as soon as may be notification of the following events in respect of a police officer of senior rank—

(a)	appointment;

(b)	confirmation in appointment;

(c)	acting appointment;

(d)	promotion;

(e)	transfer;

(/) assumption and relinquishment of duties whenever a posting takes place to or from a post for which publication is required by any written law or to give essential public information ;

(g)	reversion to substantive grade from an acting appointment;

(h)	retirement;

(/) resignation;

(j)	dismissal; and

(k)	death.

(2)	Such notification shall contain such of the following information as may be appropriate—

(a)	the police officer’s full name;

(b)	the event specified in subregulation (1) which has occurred;

(c)	the title and grade of the police officer’s post;

(d)	the effective date of event; and

(e)	reference to the minute or letter of the appropriate authority authorizing the event.

(3)	In the case of a police officer of junior rank, information concerning the events specified in subregulation (1) shall be published in Force Orders.

58.—(1) (a) The minimum educational qualification required e of an applicant for enlistment as a constable shall be that laid <) down in regulation 7.

(b) Where the appropriate authority directs or recommends that any person be enlisted into the Force at a rank other than that of constable, that authority shall prescribe the educational qualifications required of such person.

(2)	(a) Where the applicant for enlistment as a constable possesses a Junior Certificate of Education he shall enter the Pll salary scale segment at a salary of £149 p.a.

(b)	Where a constable receiving a salary of less than £149 p.a. obtains a Junior Certificate of Education he shall advance to the salary of £149 p.a. with effect from the date of the Certificate, his incremental date remaining unchanged.

(c)	For the purposes of this subregulation an applicant for enlistment who completed the Junior Certificate level of education in a school year in which no Junior Certificate examination was set in Malawi, and who possesses a headmaster’s certificate to this effect, shall be treated as possessing a Junior Certificate of Education.

(3)	(a) Where an applicant for enlistment as a constable possesses—

(i)	a Cambridge Overseas Certificate, 3rd Class or above, or

(ii)	a University of London General Certificate of Education, with passes in at least four subjects including English Language, or

(iii)	any certificate of education which is approved by the Secretary for Education as equivalent to a Cambridge Overseas Certificate,

he shall enter the PI 1 salary scale segment at a salary of £193 p.a.

(b) A constable receiving a salary of less than £193 p.a. who obtains one of the certificates listed in paragraph {a) shall advance to the salary of £193 p.a. with effect from the date of the certificate, his incremental date remaining unchanged.

PART IV Holidays and Sick Leave

59.	Nothing in this Part shall be construed as giving any police officer a right to any holiday.

60.	—(1) Subject to the exigencies of the service, a police officer may be granted by his responsible officer in any year a holiday of the following period—

(a)	if he receives a salary of less than £318 per annum, 21 working days;

(b)	if he receives a salary of £318 or more, but less than £1,910, per annum, 24 working days;

(c)	if he receives a salary of £1,910 or more, but less than £2,650, per annum, 30 working days;

(d)	if he receives a salary of £2,650 or more per annum, 36 working days.

(2)	For the purposes of this regulation, “working days” does not include Sundays or public holidays.

(3)	A police officer shall not be granted any payment in lieu of any holiday or part thereof.

61.	—(1) A police officer shall not be granted traveling time in addition to any holiday which he may be granted under regulation 60.

(2)	A police officer shall forfeit any holiday or part thereof granted to him but not taken by him in any year:

Provided that where a police officer, owing to the exigencies of the service, cannot take the holiday or any part thereof granted to him in any year, he may with the authority of the Commissioner, which authority may not be delegated to any police officer below the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police, take such holiday or part thereof in the following year.

(3)	Where an officer is allowed to take holiday leave in the year following that in which he became entitled to it, no holiday grant shall be payable to that officer in respect of such holiday leave unless such holiday leave is the only holiday leave taken by that officer in that year.

62.	—(1) A responsible officer shall maintain in respect of the police officers for whom he is responsible a holiday roster and shall enter in every such police officer’s record of service every holiday taken by such police officer.

(2) A responsible officer may require a police officer for whom he is responsible to take at least 12 days’ holiday at any time.

63.	—(1) Where, owing to a change in his salary, the period of < holiday which a police officer may be granted changes during any { year, he shall be granted a holiday in that year as follows—

(a)	if the period changes before the 2nd July, the holiday for

that year shall be the new period;

(b)	if the period changes after the 1st July, the holiday for

that year shall be the old period.

(2) Changes in salary may be anticipated for the purpose of calculating the period of holiday and allocating holidays on the holidays roster.

64.	—(1) On enlistment a police officer shall be allocated a j portion of his annual holiday which must be taken before the 31st 1 December next following the date of his enlistment- The portion : to be allocated shall be one-twelfth of the annual holiday for each completed month of service in the year of enlistment. Where this portion includes a fraction of a day, one-half of a day or more shall count as one day and any lesser fraction shall be ignored.

(2)	Where a responsible officer knows that a police officer for whom he is responsible will terminate his service during a holiday year, he shall allocate to such police officer a portion of his annual holiday and may require him to take such portion to expire on his last day of service. The portion shall be calculated as in subsection (1) above. Where a police officer has paid or is paid money in lieu of notice the portion of his annual holiday shall be reduced in respect of the period of notice in lieu of which payment was made.

(3)	Where a responsible officer does not know that a police officer for whom he is responsible will terminate his service, and a holiday in excess of his correct portion as calculated under subsection (1) is allocated to such police officer and taken before his last day of service, the responsible officer shall take no recovery action in respect of the period in respect of which such police officer’s holiday would otherwise have been reduced under subregulation (2).

65.	Where a police officer is granted any holiday which will ! include a pay day or pay days, he may, on the last working day J before his departure, be paid all regular salary which will fall due and be payable on that pay day or those pay days.

66.	Where a police officer leaves the Force without giving due ]

notice or is dismissed from the Force, he shall forfeit any holiday * not taken in the year in which he leaves or is dismissed.	'

67.	—(1) Where a police officer attends a course of instruction outside Malawi in any year, he shall not continue to earn his holiday in respect of that year during the period of the course.

(2)	Where a break or holiday occurs during such course, such break or holiday shall not count against any holiday earned in Malawi.

(3)	Upon his return to Malawi the police officer shall resume earning his holiday with effect from the date of his return to duty, pro rata to the end of the year in which he returns.

(4)	A police officer who undertakes a course of instruction lasting six months or more outside Malawi may be allowed a period of fourteen days, commencing on the day after his return to Malawi, before he is required to report for duty. Such period shall not be counted against any annual holiday earned in Malawi.

(5)	Where a police officer is granted a period of fourteen days under subregulation (4) he may not receive a holiday grant under regulation 68 or transport allowance under regulation 70 for such period.

68.	Once in each year, a police officer when proceeding on holiday may, unless he elects to receive transport warrants under regulation 70, be paid a holiday grant at the following rate—

(a)	Police officers on salaries of less than £318 per annum—£3;

(b)	All other police officers—£6.

69.	—(1) Where, owing to a change in salary, a police officer’s holiday grant changes during any year, he shall receive his holiday grant at the following rate for that year—

(a)	if his salary changes to £318 per annum or more before the

2nd July—£6;

(ib) if his salary changes to £318 per annum or more after

the 1st July—£3.

(2)	Changes in salary may not be anticipated under this regulation and the holiday grant may only be adjusted when the appropriate salary change is approved.

(3)	Where a police officer is granted a portion of a holiday period under regulation 64, he may not be paid any holiday grant:

Provided that where a police officer is enlisted before the 2nd July in any year, he may be paid the full holiday grant in respect of that year.

70.	—(1) Where a police officer is eligible for a grant under this Part he may, in lieu of such holiday grant, receive prior to his departure transport warrants for an amount sufficient to cover the cost of transportation by appropriate surface carrier of—

(a)	himself;

(b)	one wife (provided they are living together);

(c)	up to four dependent children under the age of 18 years;

and

(d)	up to 200 lb. of baggage,

from his place of duty to the nearest point in Malawi to his permanent home served by that carrier and return. The types of surface carriers and class of travel permitted in each case shall be those appropriate for duty traveling as set forth in Part VI.

(2)	Where a police officer who is eligible for a holiday grant under this Part uses his own motor vehicle for traveling on holiday, he may instead of receiving transport warrants be paid, upon his return to duty, a motor vehicle mileage allowance at the rate of 8d. a mile for the normal direct route appropriate for duty traveling to his permanent home and return, or for the actual route taken (provided it is served by an alternate surface carrier) whichever is the lesser amount:

Provided that the motor vehicle mileage allowance shall not exceed the cost of the appropriate surface fares, excluding baggage, as set forth in subregulation (1) above.

71.	A police officer who resigns, leaves without giving due notice, or is dismissed or discharged from the Force, shall forfeit any holiday grant but shall be entitled to free transport at the most economical rate for himself, his wife and dependent children together with baggage allowance appropriate to his rank to the place at which he was engaged or to another destination approved by his responsible officer.

72.	—(1) A responsible officer may grant up to six months’ sick leave with full pay and up to a further six months’ sick leave with half pay to a police officer in any one year period for absence due to illness, injury or dental treatment not occasioned by the police officer’s impropriety of conduct or neglect:

Provided that where the absence from duty is for a continuous period of three days or more, the sick leave with full pay or half pay may only be granted upon production of a certificate from a medical practitioner or dental surgeon stating that the illness, injury or dental treatment prevents the police officer from attending to his duties for a specified period, and that there is a reasonable prospect of eventual recovery and fitness for duty.

(2)	A responsible officer shall record all periods of sick leave on full pay and on half pay on the record of service of any police officer for whom he is responsible.

(3)	A responsible officer may excuse a period of absence by a police officer for whom he is responsible of two days or less due

to illness, injury or dental treatment, provided that a valid reason or certificate, acceptable to the responsible officer is given or produced by that police officer to cover the period of absence. Such an excused period of absence shall not count against the sick leave provided for in subregulation (1).

(4)	Where a police officer suffers injury for which he is entitled to be compensated under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, and is absent from duty as a result of such injury, such absence shall not count against the sick leave which may be granted under subsection (1).

73.	Where a police officer shows to his responsible officer that he requires to be absent from duty to deal with urgent private affairs, and that he has exhausted his holiday leave or that the holiday leave to which he is entitled is insufficient for his purposes, the responsible officer may, in exceptional circumstances and if such a course is consistent with the interests of the Force, grant to such officer a period of unpaid personal leave which may be taken in conjunction with a period of holiday and which shall not, for the purpose of calculating any terminal benefit, cause a break in otherwise continuous service.

74.	A responsible officer shall record all periods of unpaid leave on the record of service of a police officer for whom he is responsible indicating briefly the reason for granting such unpaid leave.

75.	A responsible officer shall make a proportional deduction from salary payable to a police officer for whom he is responsible in respect of any period of absence from duty on the part of that police officer which is not authorized or excused under this Part.

PART V Housing and Uniforms

76.	—(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires— “class” in respect of any house means the Ministry of Works

class of house;

“furnished quarters” means quarters where any furniture is provided;

“standard” and “sub-standard” in respect of housing refers to the physical condition of the quarters.

77.	All police officers shall be entitled to institutional Government quarters.

78.	—(1) The appropriate classes of housing for the various ranks of police officers shall be as follows—

(a)	Class “A” shall be appropriate quarters for police officers

of or above the rank of senior assistant commissioner of police.

(b)	Class “B” shall be appropriate quarters for police officers of the ranks of assistant commissioner of police and chief superintendent.

(c)	Class “C” shall be appropriate quarters for police officers of the ranks of senior superintendent, superintendent and assistant superintendent.

(d)	Class “D” shall be appropriate quarters for inspectors.

(e)	Class “E” shall be appropriate quarters for sub-inspectors.

(/) Class “F” shall be appropriate quarters for police officers

of or below the rank of sergeant (first class).

79.	Rents for institutional quarters shall be charged at the following rates-

(a)	A police officer who occupies institutional quarters shall pay 10 per cent, of his salary if the quarters are appropriate for his rank, and a further 2\ per cent, of his salary if the quarters are furnished.

(b)	If a police officer is housed in quarters of a higher class than that appropriate to his rank, he shall still be charged rent at the appropriate percentage of his salary as shown in the preceding paragraph. He may, however, be required to vacate such quarters when quarters appropriate to his rank become available if the quarters he occupies are required for another police officer for whom such quarters would be appropriate.

(c)	Where a police officer is housed in quarters of a lower class than that appropriate to his rank, the maximum rent chargeable shall be 10 per cent, of his salary or 10 per cent, of the top salary of the salary scale segment of the highest rank of police officer for whom such housing is appropriate, whichever is the lower. For example, if a police officer receiving a salary of £748 is occupying a Class “D” house which is appropriate housing for an inspector, he will pay 10 per cent, of £748 which is his salary. On the other hand if a police officer receiving a salary of £1,276 is occupying a Class “D” house, he will pay 10 per cent, of £958 which is the top salary of the salary scale segment of an inspector. In both cases if a house is furnished the rent payable will be increased by 2\ per cent, of the salary applicable in the above calculation of rent.

(d)	Where a police officer resides in quarters for which, because of their condition, no rent has been charged prior to the effective date of these Regulations, he shall continue to reside in such quarters rent-free until they are brought up to the appropriate standard.

(e)	All the above rents shall be deducted at monthly intervals from the officer’s salary.

80.	—(1) Where a police officer occupies quarters which have been certified as sub-standard by the Regional Engineer of the Ministry of Works and Supplies and the appropriate District Commissioner, he shall pay 5 per cent, of his salary in respect of rent plus 2\ per cent, of his salary if such quarters are furnished.

(2) The responsible officer of an officer occupying sub-standard quarters shall take all possible steps to restore such quarters to standard condition.

81.	—(1) Where a police officer occupying institutional quarters accepts for his use any Government-owned appliance, the charge for which is not included in the rent payable for that quarter and for which a charge at a flat monthly rate is payable, such charge shall be added to the rent payable by the police officer and shall also be deducted from his salary.

(2)	Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, rates for water, electricity, sanitation and other services shall be payable by the police officer or police officers occupying institutional quarters direct to the supplier of the service. A police officer shall

meet these rates on demand.

(3)	In the case of officers of junior rank, water shall be provided free of charge and sanitation charges shall be met by the Force.

82.	—(1) Where institutional quarters are allocated to a police officer he shall, on occupying and vacating such quarters, conform with the arrangements made by his responsible officer in regard to the transfer of keys.

(2) A police officer shall be deemed to be in occupation of institutional quarters as from and including the date on which he takes over the keys of the quarters up to and including the date on which he hands back the keys of the quarters. Rent is payable by such police officer for the whole period during which he is in occupation of institutional quarters, irrespective of whether he is on duty, on holiday or on sick leave. A responsible officer shall ensure that the proper rent and charges are deducted from the salary of a police officer for whom he is responsible whenever such police officer occupies or relinquishes institutional quarters under his control.

83.	Where a police officer occupies Government-owned institutional quarters, he shall be deemed to be in occupation as a mere licensee of the Government acting through the agency of the responsible officer concerned, with whose instructions in respect of the allocation and vacation of such quarters he shall comply.

84.	Where a police officer occupies Government-owned institutional quarters, he may not use those quarters for any purpose other than that of residence for himself and his family.

85.	—(1) A police officer shall not share institutional quarters with any other police officer unless he is permitted or required to do so by his responsible officer. If police officers are permitted or required to share institutional quarters, rent shall be paid as follows—

{a) if two police officers share the quarters, each police officer

shall pay half the rent that would be payable by him if he were

in sole occupation of the quarters in question;

(b) if three police officers share, each shall pay one-third, and so on in proportion.

(2) The wife of a police officer who is herself employed by the Government and occupies the same quarters as her husband shall not be required to pay rent while living in those quarters if her husband pays rent for those quarters.

86.	—(1) Where a police officer occupies institutional quarters he shall not carry out any structural or other alteration of such quarters without the written approval of his responsible officer. Such a police officer shall not be reimbursed for any such alteration unless his responsible officer shall first have so authorized.

(2)	No new fixture may be attached to any part of the quarters by a police officer occupying such quarters nor any existing fixture removed therefrom without the prior written approval of his responsible officer, who may make the approval conditional on the occupant undertaking to bear the cost of any damage arising therefrom or of any redecoration thereby necessitated.

(3)	Where a police officer occupies institutional quarters, he shall be responsible for maintaining such quarters and the entire premises thereof in a tidy and sanitary condition. Trees may not lie cut nor shrubs removed or destroyed by such police officer without the prior written approval of his responsible officer. Shrubs and plants may not be removed by a police officer from the premises of unoccupied quarters.

87.	—(1) Where a police officer is allocated institutional quarters his responsible officer shall cause all articles of furniture or equipment allocated to those quarters to be entered in an inventory.

(2) Where a police officer enters or vacates institutional quarters he shall make appropriate arrangements with his responsible officer for the acceptance or return and the signing of any inventory prescribed in Stores Regulations.

(3)	A police officer occupying institutional quarters shall forthwith report to his responsible officer the loss of or damage to any furniture or equipment allocated to those quarters.

88.	—(1) Where a police officer occupies institutional quarters, his responsible officer may recover from his salary or from any other money due and payable to him by the Government—

(a)	any rent due by him and unpaid;

(b)	any charges in payment of which he has defaulted and which the Government has consequently been obliged to pay; and

(c)	the cost of repair of any damage to the quarters or their grounds or to the furniture or equipment allocated to him, fair wear and tear excepted.

(2) Where more police officers than one share institutional quarters, such officers’ liability for rent and any other charges including the cost of repair to the quarters or their grounds or to the furniture or equipment allocated thereto shall be joint and several.

89.	—(1) Uniform entitlements shall be as from time to time laid down in Force Standing Orders.

(2) Uniform allowances shall be as laid down in Part VI hereof.

PART VI

Advances and Allowances

90.	Nothing in this Part shall give any police officer a right to any advance of salary.

91.	A responsible officer may authorize the payment to a police officer for whom he is responsible of an advance of salary for which such police officer is eligible under this Part:

Provided that an advance for the purchase of a motor vehicle may only be made to a police officer by the Secretary for the time being responsible for the Treasury on the recommendation of the Commissioner.

92.	A responsible officer shall not authorize an advance of salary to a police officer without first considering that police officer’s need for the advance, his emoluments, his family and other financial commitments and his ability to repay the advance if authorized. A further advance other than an emergency advance shall not be authorized to a police officer who has outstanding any advance of salary from public funds.

93.	A police officer may be required to produce security before an advance is authorized. The security of another police officer shall not be accepted.

94.	Where a responsible officer authorizes an advance of salary to a police officer for whom he is responsible he shall require such police officer to enter into and sign an agreement for repayment in the appropriate form and shall himself sign such agreement on behalf of the Government.

95.	Except as otherwise provided in this Part, interest shall be payable on any amount advanced to a police officer at the rate fixed by the Secretary to the Treasury at the time of the advance.

96.	The rate of repayment of an advance by a police officer shall be fixed by his responsible officer within the limits set out in this Part for such advance.

97.	All sums payable by a police officer in respect of an advance may be deducted from salary or terminal benefit payable to him.

98.	—(1) An advance of salary may be granted to a police officer to meet the cost of tuition fees and textbooks (but not examination fees) for correspondence courses from institutions approved under regulation 100.

(2)	An advance may not be granted to a police officer with less than six months’ service in the Force.

(3)	An advance may not be granted to a police officer whose salary is £488 per annum or more without the approval of the appropriate authority.

99.	An advance of salary shall not be authorized in respect of any subject or course an equivalent of which is offered by the Malawi Correspondence College or by any other institution within Malawi which has been approved by the Commissioner with the consent of the Secretary for the time being responsible for education.

100.	—(1) No education advance may be granted to a police officer unless the institution offering the course has been approved by the Secretary for the time being responsible for education and the course itself has been approved by such police officer’s responsible officer.

(2) No course may be approved by a responsible officer unless it—

(a)	leads to the award of a Junior Certificate or higher

academic or professional qualification; and

(b)	is likely to increase the efficiency of the applicant and his

usefulness in a post in the Force.

(3) The following correspondence colleges have been approved by the Secretary for Education for the purpose of this regulation—

(i)	Central African Correspondence College, P.O. Box 2373, Salisbury, Rhodesia.

(ii)	Wolsey Hall, Oxford, United Kingdom.

(iii)	Rapid Results College, Tuition House, London, S.W.19.

101.	A responsible officer shall not authorize the payment of an education advance to a police officer for whom he is responsible unless, in addition to the other requirements set out in this Part, the following requirements are satisfied—

(a)	the applicant’s existing educational qualification and service record indicate a probability that he will complete the course and pass any terminal examination; and

(b)	the proposed studies are not likely to interfere with the applicant’s normal duties and that he is likely to have sufficient spare time to complete the course within a reasonable period.

102,. An application for an education advance shall be made in duplicate on the appropriate form and submitted to the applicant’s responsible officer.

103.	—(1) Where an education advance is authorized, the police officer concerned shall sign in duplicate an agreement with the Government in the appropriate form.

(2)	The responsible officer shall, on receipt of the signed agreement, arrange for the authorized advance to be paid directly to the institution concerned in the manner most advantageous to the Government.

(3)	The maximum period for repayment shall be twenty-four months.

(4)	No interest shall be payable on an education advance.

104.	Where an unforeseeable occurrence has resulted in serious financial hardship to a police officer, such police officer may be granted an emergency advance of salary.

105.	The usual terms of an emergency advance shall be—

(a)	that the amount of the advance shall not exceed three months’ salary; and

(b)	that the advance shall be repayable with interest by monthly installments over the following periods—

(i)	an advance of one month’s salary over four months;

(ii)	an advance of two months’ salary over eight months;

(iii)	an advance of three months’ salary over twelve months.

106.	The Secretary for the time being responsible for the Treasury may, on the recommendation of the Commissioner,

authorize an emergency advance on any one or more of the following exceptional terms—

(a)	for an amount in excess of three months’ salary;

(b)	repayable over a period exceeding that specified in

regulation 105; and

(c)	at a reduced rate of interest or without interest.

107.	—(1) An application for an emergency advance shall be

made in duplicate through the applicant’s responsible officer in the appropriate form.	i

(2)	If the responsible officer considers that the application is a proper one and that an advance on exceptional terms is necessary, he shall refer the application to the Commissioner, who may recommend to the Secretary for the time being responsible for the Treasury that an advance on such terms be authorized.

108.	Where an emergency advance is authorized, the police officer concerned shall sign in duplicate an agreement with the 1 Government in the appropriate form.

109.	An advance of salary may be granted to a police officer to enable him to purchase a bicycle, provided such police officer—

(a)	has completed one year’s satisfactory service; or

(b)	requires a bicycle for the purpose of carrying out his

official duties.

110.	Not more than one bicycle advance may be granted to any police officer in any period of four years, except on the undelegated approval of the Commissioner.

111.	—(1) A bicycle advance shall not exceed twenty pounds (£20) or the actual cost of the bicycle, whichever is the lesser.

(2)	The-cost of accessories additional to standard accessories or those required by law to be fitted to the bicycle shall not be included in the price of the bicycle in calculating the amount of the advance to be granted.

(3)	The accessories which may be included in the price of a bicycle for which an advance is granted are—

(a)	standard accessories—

(i)	pump;

(ii)	toolkit;

(iii)	lock;

(b)	accessories required by law—

(i)	bell (or suitable warning device);

(ii)	two brake systems, one on each wheel;

(iii)	rear mudguard;

(iv)	red reflex reflector on rear;

(v)	forward facing white lamp.

112.	A bicycle advance shall be paid directly to the bicycle seller on behalf of the police officer concerned. Where the cost of the bicycle is greater than the amount of the advance approved, no payment shall be made until the police officer concerned produces a receipt showing that the difference between the purchase price and the advance has been paid.

113.	—(1) A bicycle advance shall be repayable with interest by monthly instalments over the following periods—

(a)	in the case of a police officer receiving an annual salary not exceeding one hundred and seventy-one pounds (£171), twenty-four months;

(b)	in the case of a police officer receiving an annual salary exceeding one hundred and seventy-one pounds (£171) but not exceeding two hundred and ninety-seven pounds (£297), twelve months;

(c)	in the case of a police officer receiving an annual salary exceeding two hundred and ninety-seven pounds (£297), six months.

(2) Where the salary of the police officer concerned changes during the repayment period the rate of repayment shall not be altered.

114.	—(1) Application for a bicycle advance shall be made in duplicate to the applicant’s responsible officer in the appropriate form.

(2) Where a bicycle advance is authorized, the police officer concerned shall sign in duplicate an agreement with the Government in the appropriate form.

115.	—(1) Subject to these Regulations, an advance of salary for the purchase of a motor vehicle, hereinafter referred to as a motor vehicle advance, may be made to a police officer who holds a valid driving licence other than a provisional licence.

(2)	A motor vehicle advance shall not be made to—

(a)	a police officer receiving a salary of less than seven hundred and sixteen pounds (£716) per annum for the purchase of a motor car; or

(b)	a police officer receiving a salary of less than two hundred and twenty pounds (£220) per annum for the purchase of a motor cycle, with or without a sidecar, or a motor scooter: Provided that where a police officer receiving a salary of less

than seven hundred and sixteen pounds (£716) per annum requires, in the opinion of his responsible officer, a motor car for the efficient

performance of his duties, the Minister for the time being responsible for finance may, in his discretion and on the recommendation of the Commissioner, authorize the granting to such police officer of an advance for the purchase of a motor car.

(3) Where a police officer does not hold a valid driving licence he may be granted an advance for the purchase of a motor car provided—

(a)	he undertakes, as a condition of the agreement with the Government required by regulation 94, to employ a full time licensed driver for the duration of the agreement or until he obtains a valid driving licence, whichever period is the shorter, and satisfies his responsible officer that such a driver is employed by him;

(b)	his responsible officer undertakes in writing to verify on the grant of the loan and at each policy renewal date thereafter that the insurance policy required by regulation 126 is valid for the driving of the motor car by the employed driver; and

(c)	his responsible officer is satisfied that he requires a motor car for the efficient performance of his duties.

116.—(1) A motor vehicle advance granted to any police officer shall not exceed seven hundred pounds (£700) or four-fifths of a year’s salary, whichever be the lesser.

(2)	Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, no police officer shall be granted more than one motor vehicle advance in any four-year period, and no police officer shall have outstanding more than one motor vehicle advance at any one time.

(3)	Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations, where a police officer with the approval of his responsible officer disposes of a motor vehicle within four years of drawing an advance for its purchase and refunds to the Government the balance outstanding at date of the sale, on the authority of the Minister for the time being responsible for finance and on the recommendation of the police officer’s responsible officer, a new advance may be granted to him calculated as to—

(a)	the number of months since the last advance was granted multiplied by £700 and divided by 48; or

(b)	four-fifths of a year’s salary, whichever is the lesser.

(4)	The limits applicable to motor vehicle advances set forth in subsection (2) shall not apply where a police officer wishes to purchase his first motor car having previously had an advance for the purchase of a motor cycle or motor scooter, and has discharged all his obligations in respect thereof. In such a case, the police officer may be granted the amount permitted as if it were his first advance.

117.	Where a police officer’s first motor vehicle advance is for the purchase of a second-hand motor vehicle, he will be eligible for a further advance as though it were his first advance, if, with the prior written approval of his responsible officer, he sells his second-hand motor vehicle within four years and repays to the Government the balance of the advance outstanding at the date of the sale.

118.	The Minister for the time being responsible for finance may, on receipt of a recommendation from the Chief Mechanical Engineer, Ministry of Works and Supplies, to the effect that as a result of an accident or complete mechanical breakdown a change of vehicle is necessary, approve the grant of a new motor vehicle advance to a police officer as if it were a first advance:

Provided that such new advance shall not exceed an amount which, when added to the amount realized on the insurance policy (after deductions in respect of any commitments on the vehicle destroyed or damaged have been made) equals the maximum amount permitted for a first advance.

119.	A motor vehicle advance shall not exceed the actual cost of the motor vehicle which shall be—

(a)	in the case of a new vehicle purchased in Malawi, the agent’s selling price of the vehicle in Malawi;

(b)	in the case of a new vehicle purchased outside Malawi, the actual purchase price plus shipping, rail and insurance charges, if any, for the transport of the vehicle to Malawi, plus local customs duty; or where the officer drives the car from the port of disembarkation or place of purchase to Malawi, the actual purchase price plus shipping and insurance charges, if any, for the transport of the vehicle to the port of disembarkation or the place of purchase, plus local customs duty. The purchase price shall not include purchase tax;

(c)	in the case of a second-hand vehicle purchased in Malawi, the valuation placed on the vehicle by a Government Valuation Board plus the expense required to render it fully serviceable and to put it in good running order, as approved by such Board:

Provided that none of the provisions of this regulation shall entitle an officer to receive an advance exceeding the total net expenditure actually incurred by him in purchasing a motor vehicle.

120.	Interest shall be payable at the rate laid down from time to time by the Secretary for the time being responsible for the Treasury.

121.	—(1) No repayment installment except the last, if necessary; shall be less than five pounds (£5) exclusive of interest, and the

repayment period shall not exceed 48 months inclusive of periods of holidays and leave. The first recovery of installments shall be made from a police officer’s salary for the month following that in which a motor vehicle advance has been made to him. A police officer may redeem a motor vehicle advance at any time, or may reduce the amount of the advance outstanding by a lump sum payment.

(2)	In the case of an expatriate police officer under contract, the repayment period may be determined regardless of the length of the period of resident service remaining to be performed by him within Malawi. No payments of gratuity or leave salary shall be made to such police officer while there remains an outstanding motor vehicle advance and his responsible officer shall ensure that no such payments are made:

Provided that in the case of an expatriate police officer who is to proceed on vacation leave or who applies for a motor vehicle advance while on vacation leave, and who has been re-engaged for a further tour of duty, his responsible officer may accept as alternatives to the full recovery from salary and gratuity payment of the outstanding balance of a motor vehicle advance—

(a)	the withholding of an amount equal to the outstanding balance of the advance (plus interest) from gratuity and leave salary until the police officer reports for duty at the commencement of the new tour; or

(b)	an arrangement by such police officer to insure the Government with a recognized insurance company against the possible loss of the outstanding balance plus interest, the full costs of such insurance being met by the police officer.

Where the responsible officer approves one of the foregoing alternatives, the written approval of the police officer to the withholding of the amounts referred to in subparagraph (a) above or the insurance cover note in respect of subparagraph {b), which should cover the full amount of the advance outstanding at the last day of resident service, shall be forwarded by the responsible officer to the Accountant General with the request to pay leave salary and gratuity.

(3)	Where a police officer is nearing normal retirement age, the repayment period shall not exceed the unexpired period of normal service.

122.	Where a responsible officer considers that a police officer for whom he is responsible may not for any reason be able to repay his motor vehicle advance, he may call upon such police officer to satisfy him in this respect. If the police officer cannot satisfy his responsible officer, the responsible officer may take physical possession of the vehicle concerned on behalf of the Government and may hold the vehicle until such time as he is so satisfied.

123.	The following procedure shall be followed whenever a police officer wishes to apply for a motor vehicle advance—

(a)	An application must be made in the appropriate form. The applicant shall arrange for the completion of the appropriate parts of the application form prior to its submission to his responsible officer.

(b)	The responsible officer shall complete the appropriate part of the application form and forward it to the Ministry of Finance.

(c)	If the advance is approved by the Minister having responsibility for finance, the appropriate part of the application form shall be completed and the application form returned to the applicant’s responsible officer.

(d)	If the applicant is to be granted the advance, he shall execute in duplicate an agreement with the Government in the appropriate form. Arrangements for the execution of this agreement shall be made by the applicant’s responsible officer who shall sign the document on behalf of the Government.

(e)	A copy of the completed agreement together with completed payment vouchers shall be forwarded to the Accountant General. The amount of the advance shall be paid directly to the vendor by the Accountant General if the purchase is made in Malawi, or by the Accountant General or the Crown Agents to the police officer himself if the purchase is made elsewhere than in Malawi. Where the cost of the motor vehicle is greater than the amount of the advance approved, no payment of the advance will be made until the police officer produces a receipt showing that the difference between the purchase price and the advance has been paid.

(f)	The applicant’s responsible officer shall be responsible for the proper recovery of the advance on behalf of the Government.

124.	In recommending an application for a motor vehicle advance, the responsible officer concerned shall give careful consideration to the applicant’s emoluments, family and other commitments, to the need of the applicant to own and his ability to insure and maintain his own transport, and to the suitability for the performance of his official duties of the vehicle which the applicant proposes to purchase. A motor vehicle of less than 148 c.c. shall be considered unsuitable for the performance of duty traveling where motorized transport is required.

125.	A motor vehicle purchased with the aid of a motor vehicle advance may not, so long as any part of the advance remains outstanding, be removed from Malawi without the prior approval of the appropriate responsible officer.

126.	—(1) A police officer who has received a motor vehicle ] advance shall take out a comprehensive insurance policy for the 1 value of the motor vehicle bought by him which shall not be less than the value of the amount of the advance outstanding, and the policy shall be renewed regularly as long as the advance remains outstanding. Such a comprehensive insurance policy shall not be endorsed to limit the liability of the insurance company to occasions upon which the insured vehicle is being driven by the insured person or other named person only.

(2)	The Government’s interest in the vehicle shall be recorded in the policy of comprehensive insurance so that the insurance company does not pay insurance to the police officer in ignorance of the Government’s interest.

(3)	A policy of comprehensive insurance shall be produced annually on demand to the police officer's responsible officer who shall ensure that this subregulation is observed.

127.	—(1) A motor vehicle advance shall be made on the understanding that a police officer receiving it will use the vehicle so purchased for traveling on official duties whenever required to do so as long as he is in possession of such vehicle,

(2) A vehicle purchased with a motor vehicle advance shall not be used for hire:

Provided that such vehicle may, with the consent of its owner’s responsible officer, be hired for the performance of public duties.

128.	A mileage allowance of one penny per mile may be paid to a police officer for such occasional journeys on duty by bicycle as may be approved by his responsible officer.

129.	—(1) A commuted mileage allowance may be paid as follows to a police officer who is required to travel regularly on duty by bicycle with the approval of his responsible officer—

(a)	if he travels 60 miles or more but less than 90 miles per

month, 5s. 0d.;

(b)	if he travels 90 miles or more but less than 120 miles per

month, 7s. 6d.;

(c)	if he travels 120 miles or more but less than 150 miles per

month, 12s. 6d.;

(d)	if he travels 150 miles or more per month, 17s. 6d.

(2) The responsible officer concerned shall notify the Accountant General and the Auditor General in writing whenever an allowance under this regulation is approved.

130.	A commuted bicycle mileage allowance may not be paid except on the production each month of an honour certificate signed by the police officer to the effect that he has kept his bicycle in good order for the period in question and that it was continually available for official duties.

131.	A police officer may use his own motor vehicle for duty traveling authorized by his responsible officer, who shall ensure that the type of vehicle to be used is appropriate for the duties to be performed. Mileage allowances shall be payable in respect of such authorized traveling at the following rates—

(a) for a motor car	9d. per mile
(b) for a specialized vehicle as defined in regulation 132	Is. 2d. per mile
(c) for a motor cycle, with or without a sidecar, or a motor scooter, of—  (i) less than 98 c.c.	Id. per mile
(ii) 98 c.c. to 147 c.c.	2d. per mile
(iii) 148 c.c. to 347 c.c.	4d. per mile
(iv) 348 c.c. and above	5d. per mile

132.—(1) A “specialized vehicle” in respect of which the mileage allowance laid down in regulation 131 may be paid shall

be—

(a)	a four wheel drive vehicle;

(b)	a motor vehicle licensed as a goods vehicle or public service vehicle; and

(c)	any other motor vehicle which, on the written authority of the responsible officer concerned, may be considered a specialized vehicle for the purposes of these Regulations.

(2) A police officer may claim an allowance at the specialized vehicle rate for the use of his own specialized vehicle only upon the authority of his responsible officer that the specialized vehicle is necessary and appropriate for the performance of the official duties concerned. Where a police officer uses his own specialized vehicle in spite of the fact that it is not necessary or appropriate for the performance of the official duties concerned, he may only claim an allowance at the rate appropriate to a motor car. Where a police officer purchased a specialized vehicle because such vehicle was considered by his responsible officer at the time of purchase as necessary and appropriate for the performance of his official duties, he may continue to claim an allowance at the specialized vehicle rate for duty traveling as long as that specialized vehicle is in his possession, notwithstanding that his later duties make the use of such a vehicle unnecessary or inappropriate.

Police Regulations

133.	—(1) No claim for motor vehicle mileage allowance shall be admitted for a single journey unless the journey out and back exceeds five miles. In an exceptional case, where the nature of the police officer’s duties necessarily requires, his responsible officer may approve a claim arising from a number of journeys, each of less than five miles.

(2)	A police officer shall not make more than one claim for motor vehicle mileage allowance in any one calendar month unless, in the opinion of his responsible officer, delay in the submission for payment of a particular claim would cause financial hardship to the claimant. In such a case the second or subsequent claim in a given calendar month shall also be approved by the responsible officer concerned.

134.	—(1) The necessity for the traveling shall be clearly shown on the voucher claiming the allowance.

(2)	Where Government transport is provided, or a vehicle has been hired at public expense, for any particular duty, then such Government or hired transport shall be used to the maximum economic extent. A police officer may be directed to use such Government or hired transport and, if so directed, shall not use his own vehicle instead of it.

(3)	Where a police officer’s own vehicle cannot be used for the performance of his duties he shall not hire transport for the performance of his duties without the consent of his responsible officer, and no charges in respect of such hired transport shall be paid by the Government without the authority of his responsible officer.

(4)	Every police officer shall keep a record of all distances travelled by him on duty.

(5)	Every responsible officer shall ensure that his own duty traveling and that of the police officers for whom he is responsible is conducted on the most economical lines, and that when two or more police officers are proceeding on the same official journey they must make use of every opportunity for sharing transport.

135.	—(1) A monthly commuted motor vehicle mileage allowance may be granted to a police officer, whose duties necessitate frequent short journeys within a township or other circumscribed area, on the authority of his responsible officer.

(2)	In every case a commuted allowance shall be granted in respect of a post and not to an individual and shall be payable only when the police officer holding the post uses his own motor vehicle.

(3)	A commuted allowance shall be in respect of traveling on duty from a police officer’s normal place of work to such places as his duties may take him during the day, and from those places

Police Regulations

back to his normal place of work, and shall not take into account traveling between the police officer’s living quarters and his place of work.

(4)	Commuted allowances shall be calculated in miles and paid at the rates laid down in regulation 131.

(5)	An application or recommendation for payment of commuted allowance to a police officer shall be made to his responsible officer.

(6)	In considering such application or recommendation the responsible officer shall have regard to the average monthly mileage recorded by the police officer concerned over as long a period as possible, which period shall not be less than three months or exceed twelve months.

(7)	A responsible officer shall from time to time, and not less than once annually, review every allowance granted under this regulation to any police officer for whom he is responsible and, having regard to the duties, type of vehicle and mileage record of such police officer, shall increase, decrease, continue or withdraw the allowance as he considers it necessary to do so.

(8)	A responsible officer shall notify the Auditor General in writing whenever an allowance, to a police officer for whom he is responsible, under this regulation is approved, altered or terminated, giving the following details—

(a)	the title of the post held by such officer;

(b)	the amount of the allowance (giving the miles per month

and type of vehicle);

(c)	the area in which traveling covered by the allowance is

performed; and

(d)	the date from which the allowance is to be paid, altered

or terminated.

(9)	A commuted allowance shall not be paid in full for any period when the police officer concerned was not using a motor vehicle for the performance of the duties for which the allowance was granted or was not performing those duties himself. In such a case, the commuted allowance will be reduced pro rata for every working day of the month for which such duties were not so performed.

(10)	A claim for a commuted allowance that has been approved shall be made monthly and shall bear a certificate in the appropriate form, to the effect that the claimant kept his motor vehicle

Police Regulations

in good running order throughout the month to which the claim refers, and specifying the number of working days in that month during which the claimant was prevented for any reason from carrying out the duties for which the allowance was granted.

(11)	Where a police officer’s own vehicle is unserviceable, he may, with the prior approval of his responsible officer, claim a commuted mileage allowance to which he is otherwise entitled for the use of a borrowed or hired vehicle and shall add to his claim a certificate in the appropriate form, to the effect that—

(a)	his vehicle was unserviceable;

(b)	he used another vehicle with the approval of his

responsible officer; and

(c)	no other claim will be submitted in respect of mileage to

which the present claim relates.

136.	—(1) Every police officer who lives permanently in a house which is located more than two and one-half miles from his place of work shall be entitled to a house to office mileage allowance for up to a maximum of eight miles by the most direct route, at the rates set forth in regulation 138. Every payment of such an allowance shall require the approval of the responsible officer concerned subject to the production of an honour certificate in the appropriate form.

(2)	A responsible officer shall, before approving the payment of any house to office mileage allowance to a police officer for whom he is responsible, satisfy himself that the distance between such police officer’s house and his place of work is stated correctly on the payment voucher.

137.	A house to office mileage allowance shall be paid monthly and shall only be paid in respect of that period during the month in question during which a police officer has used his own vehicle to travel to and from work and has occupied the house for which the allowance is approved. Where a police officer has not used his own vehicle to travel to and from work or has not occupied the house for which the allowance is approved, the allowance shall be reduced pro rata for every working day of the period when the vehicle was not so used or when the approved house was not so occupied.

138.	—(1) House to office mileage allowances shall be paid at the following rates—

(a)	Vehicle	Rate	per	month

Bicycles and motor cycles under 148 c.c. 3s. 6d.

(Jb) Vehicle	Rate per month

for every full half mile that a police officer's house is distant from his place of work by the shortest route, from a minimum of two and one-half miles to a maximum of eight miles

(i) Motor cycles 148 c.c. or over	..	2s. 6d.

(ii) Motor cars ..	..	..	10s. Od.

(2)	The rates under paragraphs (b) (i) and (b) (ii) of subregulation (1) shall be calculated to the nearest full half mile.

139.—(1) Where a police officer travels on duty within Malawi, the cost of his fares together with the cost of transporting necessary duty equipment shall be paid by the Government.

(2)	Where a police officer travels to take up a first appointment, on compulsory posting or compulsory transfer to another station or on retirement, his fares and those of one wife and any dependent children under the age of 18 years shall be paid by the Government.

(3)	Where a police officer is sent on a course of training, study, research or instruction, the cost of his fares shall be paid by the Government together with a personal baggage allowance as if he were on duty.

(4)	Where a police officer who is sent on a course of training, study, research or instruction either within or outside Malawi and as a result is required by the Government to vacate the housing he has at his duty station, the fares of one wife and any dependent children under the age of 18 years shall be paid by the Government to their permanent home on such vacation and on return by the police officer to his duty station following the completion of the course, together with a baggage allowance equal to that on compulsory transfer. Where such police officer uses his own motor vehicle for personal transport to and from the place where such course is to be taken, he may, in addition to any other allowance for which he may be eligible under these Regulations, be paid an allowance under regulation 141 (2) in respect of the delivery of eligible members of his family from his duty station to their permanent home when such police officer departs on such course, and from their permanent home to such police officer’s duty station on his return.

140.	Where a police officer or his family is eligible for any Class of transport or baggage allowance under regulation 139 and where Government transport cannot be provided, the class of public allowance86 service travel and die amount of personal baggage which may be transported by surface shall be as follows—

	Class of	Personal  baggage  allowance	Personal baggage allowance on first appointment, compulsory posting.
Salary	transport	on duty	compulsory transfer or retirement
Under £149	bus  third class lake (deck)  third class rail	501b.	5001b.
Under £318	bus  second class lake (bunk)  third class rail	50 lb.	1,000 lb.
Under £488	bus  second class lake (bunk)  third class rail	50 lb.	1,500 lb.
Under £748	bus  second class lake (bunk)  second class rail	100 lb.	3,000 lb.
£748 and over	bus  first class lake  (cabin)  first class rail	100 lb.	4,000 lb.

141.—(1) A police officer may use his own motor vehicle fot duty travelling authorized by bis responsible officer, in which case a full motor vehicle mileage allowance may be paid at the rate set out in regulation 131 in lieu of transport and baggage allowance and no allowance shall be paid to such police officer in respect of transport of personal baggage.

(2)	A police officer may use his own motor vehicle when travelling to take up a first appointment on compulsory posting or compulsory transfer or on retirement. In such cases full motor vehicle mileage allowances may be paid at the rate set out in regulation 131, in lieu of transport allowances, for the normal direct route appropriate for duty travelling. If, owing to the nature of

Police Regulations

the motor vehicle concerned, it is not possible for such police officer to take with him all the members of his family eligible under regulation 139, those eligible members who cannot travel with such police officer may travel by the appropriate surface transport under regulation 140 at Government expense. In addition to any mileage or transport allowance payable under this subregulation, such police officer may also be paid the appropriate personal baggage allowance in full under regulation 140.

142.	A police officer may be required or permitted to travel by air on duty and in such a case his fare shall be met by the Government. Where such police officer’s responsible officer is satisfied that the nature of the duties which the police officer is to perform requires it, he may authorize the payment by the Government of any excess baggage charges in excess of the police officer’s airline ticket baggage allowance.

143.	—(1) A police officer may be required or permitted to travel by air on duty outside Malawi or when sent on a course of training, study, research or instruction outside Malawi. In such cases, the cost of such police officer’s fare shall be met by the Government and the class of air passage shall be determined as follows—

Grade of post	Class of air passage

Superscale S4 and above ..	.. first class

Others ..	..	..	.. economy class

Where such police officer’s responsible officer is satisfied that the nature of the duties which the police officer is to perform requires it, he may authorize the payment by the Government of any excess baggage charges in excess of the police officer’s airline ticket baggage allowance.

(2) A police officer travelling on duty outside Malawi as a representative at an official conference or discussion, or as a member of a delegation headed by a Minister which is formally representing the Government shall travel by economy class unless specific authority to travel first class is given by the Secretary to the President. Where the Secretary to the President is satisfied that the nature of the duties which the police officer is to perform require it, he may authorize the payment by the Government of any excess baggage charges in excess of the police officer’s airline ticket baggage allowance.

144.	A police officer may be required or permitted to travel by rail on duty outside Malawi or when sent on a course of training, study, research or instruction outside Malawi. In such cases the cost of such police officer’s fare shall be met by the

(3)	In respect of a police officer of junior rank, subsistence rates under this regulation shall apply to any period of twelve hours where such period occurs within any period of twenty-four hours.

147.	—(1) Where a police officer of senior rank necessarily stays at a Government rest house—

{a) while travelling on duty within Malawi; or

(b)	when detained within Malawi away from his normal duty station; or

(c)	when he and his family, travelling under official arrangements, are necessarily detained on return from abroad before proceeding to his leave address or next duty station,

he shall have the accommodation charges at such rest house reimbursed to him by the Government in addition to the payment of such subsistence allowance as may be payable under regulation 146 or regulation 152. If such a police officer is necessarily accommodated at an hotel or at the Government hostel in Zomba he may be refunded reasonable accommodation and meal expenses in lieu of the payment of any subsistence allowance for the period spent in such hotel or in the Government hostel. The decision of the responsible officer concerned shall be final in the interpretation of the words “necessarily” and “reasonable” which shall be related to the duties which the police officer is required to perform, and shall not be questioned in any court.

(2) The provisions of subregulation (1) may, on the prior authority of the responsible officer concerned, be applied to a police officer of junior rank where, in the opinion of his responsible officer, the circumstances and nature of the duties of such police officer require that he be accommodated in a Government rest house, hotel or the Government hostel in Zomba.

148.	—(1) Where a police officer is absent from his station on duty but is not to spend the subsequent night away from his normal duty station, he may, if he necessarily incurs expenses on a meal or meals in a restaurant or hotel, receive subsistence allowance up to the following maximum rates upon presentation by him of receipted vouchers or honour certificates detailing the date, place and amount of any expenditure incurred by him—

				Maximum	
Salary per	annum			rate	Maximum rate for
				per meal	all meals
Less than £149 £149 or more	but	less	than	Is. 3d.	2s. Od.
£318 .. £318 or more	but	less	than	Is. 9d.	3s. Od.
£488 .. £488 or more	but	less	than	2s. 6d.	5s. Od.
£748 ..		.		3s. 6d.	6s. Od.
£748 and over	.	.		6s. Od.	10s. Od.

Police Regulations

(2) Claims for meals under this regulation shall not be admissible if any claim for subsistence allowance under regulation 146 has been made covering the same period.

149.	—(1) Where a police officer travels on duty, he may, on the authority of his responsible officer, be reimbursed, in addition to receiving any subsistence allowance, for the following expenses upon presentation of receipted vouchers or honour certificates—

(a)	reasonable laundry charges where the police officer is absent from his duty station for more than 48 hours and qualifies for any reimbursement or refund under regulation 146; and

(b)	telephone, local travelling and any other expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred by the police officer in the performance of his duties.

(2) The decision of the responsible officer concerned shall be final in the interpretation of the words “reasonable” and “reasonably and necessarily” as used in subregulation (1) above, and shall not be questioned in any court.

150.	Where a police officer in the performance of his duties lives in any Government caravan or camp and, in the opinion of his responsible officer, such caravan or camp constitutes that police officer’s normal duty station, the. police .officer shall not be entitled to any subsistence allowance while living in the caravan or camp.

151.	A subsistence allowance shall not be payable to'-a police officer while he is the guest of another police officer who qualifies for any hospitality allowance.

152.—(1) Where a police officer travels within Malawi on first appointment, compulsory posting or compulsory transfer, retirement, or on any other occasion when authority is given by his responsible officer for him to be accompanied by his family or for his family alone to travel at Government expense, he shall be eligible for the payment of the appropriate subsistence allowance rates set out in the second or third column for the salary set out in the first column, for nights necessarily spent in transit—

	Police officer	Police officer and his wife together and/or with his
	or his wife	dependent children
Salary per annum	travelling	under the age of
	alone; rate	18 years; rate
	per night	per night
!than £149	2s. Od.	2s. 9d.

		Police officer and his wife together
	Police officer	and/or with his
	or his wife	dependent children
Salary per annum	travelling	under the age of
	alone; rate	18 years; rate
	per night	per night
£149 or more but less than		
£318	3s. Od.	4s. Od.
£318 or more but less than £488  £488 or more but less than	5s. Od.	6s. Od.
£748	6s. Od.	8s. Od.
£748 and over	10s. Od.	13s. Od.

(2)	Subsistence allowance under this regulation shall not be payable to a police officer when proceeding on or returning from an annual holiday.

153.	Where a police officer uses his own motor vehicle and qualifies for any subsistence allowance under regulation 132, such subsistence allowance shall be paid only in respect of those nights necessarily spent in transit by the most direct route. For the purpose of this regulation, “ nights necessarily spent in transit” shall mean nights that would have been spent if the police officer had travelled not less than 200 miles per day.

154.	Subsistence allowance under regulation 152 shall not be payable to a police officer while he is the guest of another police officer who qualifies for any hospitality allowance.

155.—(1) Where a police officer travels on duty outside Malawi as a representative to an official conference or discussion or as a member of a delegation, headed by a Minister, which is formally representing the Government, he may claim subsistence allowance at the rates set out in column A of regulation 157. No additional allowance or refund of expenses shall be paid to such police officer in respect of other expenses incurred by him in the course of such travel.

(2)	Where overnight hospitality is provided in circumstances under subregulation (1) or overnight accommodation is provided in transit, and the police officer is not himself called upon to meet overnight expenses, an allowance of £4 per night shall be payable to him.

(3)	A police officer travelling in the circumstances outlined in subregulation (1) shall, before his departure, apply to his responsible officer for authority for the payment to him of subsistence allowance under this regulation. If such authority is not

Police Regulations

applied for or, if applied for, is not granted, such police officer shall not be paid subsistence allowance under this regulation, but may be paid subsistence allowance under regulation 156.

(4)	Where an allowance under this regulation has been made to a police officer in advance to cover a greater period, or at a higher rate, than subsequent events justify, he shall make the appropriate refund to the Government.

156.—(1) Where a police officer with the prior approval of his responsible officer travels on duty outside Malawi in circumstances other than those covered under regulation 155 (for example, routine duty visits and similar non-representational functions and meetings), a standard rate of subsistence allowance shall be payable to him for each night spent away from his normal station. No additional allowance or refund of expenses shall be paid to such police officer in respect of other expenses incurred by him in the course of such travel.

(2)	The rates of subsistence allowance for various countries payable under this regulation shall be those listed in column B of regulation 157. Where a police officer travels to a country not listed, the rate payable to him shall be determined by the appropriate authority.

(3)	Where a police officer with the approval of his responsible officer necessarily incurs expenses which are substantially higher than the rate of subsistence allowance payable under this regulation, the appropriate authority may—

(a)	if the circumstances are known in advance, fix a special ad hoc allowance;

(b)	if the circumstances are not known in advance, authorize reimbursement on the basis of actual expenditure provided it is satisfied that it would have been impossible for the police officer to keep his expenditure to the allowance payable to him under this regulation, on the production of satisfactory evidence that any expenditure over the allowance payable under this regulation was necessarily and actually incurred:

Provided that in no circumstances shall reimbursement exceed the allowance payable under subregulation (1) of regulation 155.

(4)	Where a police officer is provided with overnight accommodation without expense to himself he shall only be eligible for payment of a subsistence allowance at half the rate payable under this regulation applicable to the country in which he is staying.

(5)	Subsistence allowance shall not be payable where meals and accommodation are included with passage costs.

(6)	Where an allowance under this regulation has been made to a police officer in advance to cover a greater period, or a higher rate, than subsequent events justify, he shall, on his return, make the appropriate refund to the Government.

100		Constitution				
[Subsidiary]		Police Regulations				
Subsistence	157.—(1) The subsistence rates payable in terms of regulations					
rates for	155 and 156 shall be—					
travel			Rate A			
	Country		(under			(under
			regula-			regula-
			tion 155)			tion 156)
			£	s.	d.	£ s. d.
	Austria		9	6	8	7 0 0
	Bahamas		13	6	8	10 0 0
	Botswana		9	6	8	7 0 0
	Belgium		10	0	0	7 10 0
	Canada		13	6	8	10 0 0
	Ceylon		9	6	8	7 0 0
	Denmark		10	13	4	8 0 0
	Ethiopia		9	0	0	6 15 0
	Finland		9	0	0	6 15 0
	France		11	0	0	8 5 0
	Germany		8	13	4	6 10 0
	Ghana		11	13	4	8 15 0
	India ..		7	6	8	5 10 0
	Israel ...		8	13	4	6 10 0
	Italy ..		8	13	4	6 10 0
	Kenya		8	13	4	6 10 0
	Lesotho		5	13	4	4 5 0
	Malagasy		10	0	0	7 10 0
	Mauritius		7	6	8	5 10 0
	Mozambique		6	6	8	4 15 0
	Netherlands		9	0	0	6 15 0
	Nigeria		10	13	4	8 0 0
	Norway		10	0	0	7 10 0
	Pakistan		7	6	8	5 10 0
	Portugal		6	15	0	5 0 0
	Rhodesia		7	6	8 Salisbury	5 10 0
					Bulawayo	4 10 0
					Elsewhere	3 10 0
	South Africa	.	7	6	8 Johannesburg	5 10 0
					Capetown	5 10 0
					Pretoria	4 10 0
					Elsewhere	3 10 0
	Swaziland		5	13	4	4 5 0
	Sweden		13	6	8	10 0 0
	Switzerland		10	0	0	7 10 0
	Taiwan		8	0	0	6 0 0
	Tanzania		8	13	4	6 10 0
	Uganda		9	0	0	6 15 0
	U.K			8	13	4	6 10 0
	U.S.A.		13	6	8	10 0 0
	Zambia	, .	10	6	8	7 15 0

Police Regulations

(2) Where a police officer of junior rank travels on duty outside Malawi, the rate of subsistence allowance shall be fixed by the appropriate authority having regard to the circumstances but in no case shall it exceed the rates prescribed above.

158.	Where a police officer travels outside Malawi on first appointment, compulsory posting or compulsory transfer, retirement or on any other occasion when authority is given for him to be accompanied by his family or for his family alone to travel at Government expense, he shall be eligible for the payment of the following subsistence allowance rates for nights necessarily spent in transit—

	In Rhodesia, Zambia, South Africa,	In all
	Botswana,	other
	Lesotho,	countries—
	Swaziland—	rate per
	rate per	night
	night	
for a police officer or his wife		
travelling alone	30s.	40s.
for a police officer and his wife		
travelling together	50s.	70s.
additional for each dependent		
child under 12 years	10s.	15s.
additional for each dependent child 12 years and over but		
under 18 years	20s.	30s.

(2) Subsistence allowance under this regulation shall not be paid in respect of any period during which a police officer’s meals or those of his family are in any way paid for by the Government or provided for by a carrier.

159.	A police officer may be permitted to use his own motor vehicle for the purposes set out in regulation 158. Where such police officer qualifies for any subsistence allowance under that regulation, such subsistence allowance shall be paid only in respect of those nights necessarily spent in transit by the most direct route. For the purpose of this regulation, “ nights necessarily spent in transit ” means nights that would have been spent if such police officer had travelled not less than 200 miles per day.

160.	Notwithstanding the provisions of this Part, the subsistence allowance rates payable to a police officer for nights spent in Tanzania or Mozambique anchorages on Lakes Malawi and Chilwa shall be the same rates as are applicable to subsistence within Malawi under comparable circumstances.

[Subsidiary]

Subsistence rates— travelling outside Malawi with family

Use of own

motor

vehicle for

travel

outside

Malawi

Exception— lake

anchorages

L.R.0.111971

Police Regulations

161.	Where a police officer is sent by the Force for a course of training, study, research or instruction outside Malawi of three months’ duration or longer, the cost of board, lodging and ancillary expenses directly related to the course shall be expressed as a consolidated maintenance allowance. The rate for such allowance shall be determined in each case by the appropriate authority and shall be paid in addition to such police officer’s regular salary and in lieu of any other subsistence allowance.

162.	—(1) Where a police officer is sent by the Force for a course of training, study, research or instruction outside Malawi of less than three months’ duration the following subsistence rates may be authorized by his responsible officer to be paid in addition to the police officer’s regular salary and in lieu of any other subsistence allowance—

(a)	where the police officer is required to meet the cost of board and lodging, 42s. per night for the first 28 nights and 28s. per night thereafter;

(b)	if either board or lodging is paid for or provided free of charge, 21s. per night for the first 28 nights and 14s. per night thereafter;

(c)	if both board and lodging are paid for or provided free of charge, 10s. per night.

(2)	In addition to the subsistence rates payable under subregulation (1), fees, textbooks and ancillary expenses directly related to the course may be refunded to the police officer concerned on the authority of the appropriate authority.

163.	Where a police officer of junior rank attends any course of instruction within Malawi, he shall be eligible to receive a training allowance at the rate of Is. for each day of the course, and shall not be eligible to receive subsistence allowance under regulation 146.

164.	A police officer who is required by the Government to entertain a guest of the Government overnight with or without meals may be paid a hospitality allowance equivalent to the subsistence allowance for which he would himself be eligible while travelling on duty within Malawi.

165.	A police officer who is required by the Government to entertain a guest of the Government to meals without providing overnight accommodation may be paid hospitality allowances for such occasional meals at the following rates—

Breakfast ..	..	Is. 6d.

Lunch	..	..	..	2s. 6d.

Dinner	..	..	..	3s. Od.

Police Regulations

166.	Every claim for a hospitality allowance shall be submitted by the claimant to his responsible officer who shall determine whether or not the guest concerned is a “ guest of the Government

167.	Where a police officer is required by the Force to accommodate another police officer who is travelling on duty and who would otherwise be eligible for subsistence allowance under this Part, an equivalent hospitality allowance shall be payable to the host police officer and, for this period, subsistence allowance shall not be paid to the guest police officer. In such circumstances it shall be the responsibility of the guest police officer to claim the appropriate hospitality allowance on behalf of his host.

168.	—(1) A police officer may claim a local transfer allowance in the following circumstances—

(a)	on each occasion on which he must move his household effects to a new station on compulsory transfer or compulsory posting from one station to another or when required by the Force to do so at the same station;

(b)	on each occasion on which he is ordered to move his household effects, other than on a purely temporary basis, from institutional quarters in which he has been required by the Government to live;

(c)	on each occasion on which he is ordered temporarily to vacate institutional quarters in which he has been required by the Government to live;

(id) on each occasion on which he is sent on a course of training, study, research or instruction and is required to remove his household effects from the housing which he has at his duty station;

(e) on each occasion on which he is transferred from quarters of a class inappropriate to his grade to quarters of a higher class under Part V provided that he may claim such allowance for one move only at any one station.

(2)	A local transfer allowance shall not be paid to a police officer who changes his station on temporary transfer or temporary posting, nor shall it be paid to a police officer who lives in a caravan or one otherwise posted for duty in the field.

169.	The rate of local transfer allowance payable to a police officer under regulation 168 shall be 1 /60th of his basic annual salary subject to a maximum of £25:

Provided that the rate payable under regulation 168 (1) (c) and (e) shall be 1/120th of such police officer’s basic annual salary subject to a maximum of £12 10s. Od.

170.	—(1) A police officer of senior rank shall be entitled to the following allowances payable in January of each year—

(a)	if he is a uniformed officer, a uniform allowance of £25;

Police Regulations

(b)	if he is a Criminal Investigation Department or a Special Branch Officer, a plain clothes allowance of £25.

(2)	In addition to this entitlement in terms of subsection (1), a police officer of senior rank in the Criminal Investigation Department or Special Branch shall be paid an allowance of £12 10s. Od. per annum for the maintenance of one set of uniform for use as required. Such allowance shall be paid monthly but shall not be paid in respect of any period of leave.

171.	A police officer of junior rank in the Criminal Investigation Department or the Special Branch shall be entitled to the following allowances—

(a)	plain clothes, £2 Os. Od. per month;

(b)	plain clothes (casual), Is. 4d. per day.

172.	—(1) At the discretion of the Commissioner an efficiency allowance may be paid to a constable in respect of the efficient performance of his duties as follows—

(a)	to a constable of more than two but less than five years’ service, 5s. Od. per month;

(b)	to a constable of more than five but less than eight years’ service, 10s. Od. per month;

(c)	to a constable of more than eight years’ service, 15s. Od. per month.

Such allowance shall cease to be paid on the promotion of a recipient and may at any time cease on the order of the Commissioner in the event of the recipient’s failure to perform his duties efficiently.

(2) Where the Commissioner orders the cessation of payment of efficiency allowance to a constable on the grounds of his failure to perform his duties efficiently, such constable shall, for the purpose of qualifying for future payment of efficiency allowance, be treated as if his service in the Force had begun on the date on which he last received a payment of efficiency allowance.

173.	Duty allowances at the rates set out in the right hand column shall be paid to officers in the posts and ranks set out in the left hand column—

Armourers	15s. Od. per month
Bandsmen	
Assistant bandmasters	15s. Od. per month
Sergeants	10s. Od. per month
First class bandsmen	7s. 6d. per month
''Second class bandsmen	5s. Od. per month
Buglers ..	5s. Od. per month

PART VII Terminal Benefits

174. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires—	interpreta-

tion

“dependant” in relation to a police officer means such relative of or person dependent upon that officer as the Minister may decide;

“Government” and “Malawi Government” includes the governments of the former Nyasaland Protectorate and the former Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland;

“pensionable salary” has the meaning set out in regulation 186;

“pensionable service” has the meaning set out in regulation 185;

“qualifying service” has the meaning set out in regulation 177;

“salary” has the meaning set out in regulation 179.

175.	—(1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to any expatriate Application police officer.

(2)	This Part shall, subject to subregulation (1), apply to any g.n. person who was, immediately prior to the coming into operation 229/1951 of the Police (Pensions and Gratuities) (Revocation) Rules, 1969,	107/1952

in receipt of a pension under the Police (Pensions and Gratuities)	190/1954

Rules.

Police Regulations

176.	Every post in the Force shall be a pensionable post.

177.	Subject to the provisions of regulation 178 qualifying service shall be the total of any periods between the date on which a police officer began to draw salary in the Force and the date of his leaving the Force, inclusive, without deduction of any period during which he has been absent on any holiday or leave granted under Part V:

Provided that no period during which an officer is—

(a)	absent from duty on unpaid leave granted under Part IV;

(b)	suspended from duty without salary in any case in which salary for the period of such suspension is not later restored;

shall be taken into account as qualifying service without the specific approval of the Minister.

178.	—(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Part, only periods of service in the Force of at least six consecutive months shall be taken into account as qualifying service.

(2)	Any of the following breaks in the service shall cause a police officer’s qualifying service to end with effect from the beginning of such break—

(a)	a break in service of 36 months or more or an aggregate of breaks in service of 84 months or more:

Provided that no period during which a police officer is absent from duty on any unpaid leave granted under Part IV shall be taken into account as a break in service;

(b)	a break in service caused by the retirement, resignation or dismissal of the police officer;

(c)	a break in service resulting from disciplinary proceedings against the police officer where the appropriate authority has directed that such break causes his qualifying service to end.

(3)	Where a police officer resumes service in the Force following a break in service set out in subregulation (2), he shall commence a wholly new period of qualifying service, no account being taken of any previous qualifying service, except where the break is specifically condoned by the Minister.

(4)	Notwithstanding the provisions of this regulation, service in the armed forces of the United Kingdom for any period between 3rd September, 1939, and final discharge (other than for misconduct) from that service before or after the cessation of hostilities shall not cause a break in qualifying service.

Police Regulations

179.	In this Part, “salary” means basic salary plus efficiency allowances if applicable but shall not include any other allowance or emolument unless such allowance or emolument has been approved by the Minister for the purpose of computing pension or gratuity as the case may be.

180.	—(1) The terminal benefits provided for by this Part shall be subject to disciplinary control and the Minister may, on the recommendation of the appropriate authority, reduce or refuse to grant any terminal benefit.

(2)	A police officer who is dismissed from the Force on the grounds of misconduct shall not be granted any pension, gratuity or other terminal benefit.

(3)	AH terminal benefits granted to a police officer shall be subject to deduction therefrom of all debts due by such police officer to Government including any surcharge or fine.

181.	Except for the purpose of satisfying—

(a)	a debt due to the Government; or

(b)	an order by any court for payment of periodical sums of money towards the maintenance of the wife, or a former wife, or a minor child or children of the police officer to whom the terminal benefit has been granted, a terminal benefit shall not be capable of assignment or transfer nor shall it be liable to attachment, sequestration or levy for or in respect of any debt or claim whatsoever.

182.	An application by a police officer, or, where such polite officer has died prior to the granting of any terminal benefit, by such of his personal representatives, heirs or dependants as are eligible for any gratuity under regulation 190, shall be made in duplicate in the appropriate form.

183.	—(1) A police officer against whom no disciplinary proceedings are being taken and who—

(a)	retires voluntarily after completing 10 years’ pensionable service—

(i)	having attained the age of forty-five years;

(ii)	having completed 25 years’ qualifying service; or

(iii)	on the grounds that he is suffering from infirmity of mind or body, not occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect, which interferes with the performance of his duties; or

(b)	after completing 10 years’ pensionable service is required to retire—

(i)	on medical grounds not occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect; or

Police Regulations

(ii)	in the public interest; or

(c)	after completing 10 years’ pensionable service is permitted by the Minister to retire in order to assume duties under the Chiefs Act or under the Local Government (District Councils) Act,

shall be granted a pension at the rate set out in regulation 184.

(2)	A police officer against whom no disciplinary proceedings are being taken and who is required to retire—

(a)	on grounds of redundancy;

(b)	on abolition of office; or

(c)	because the re-organization of the Force makes such retirement desirable in the interests of efficiency or economy;

shall be granted—

(d)	a pension at the rate set out in regulation 184; and

(e)	an additional pension at the annual rate of one-sixtieth of his pensionable salary for each completed period of 3 years’ pensionable service:

Provided that—

(i)	such additional pension shall not exceed ten-sixtieths of such police officer’s pensionable salary;

(ii)	the pension and the additional pension together shall not exceed the pension for which the police officer would have been eligible if he had continued until the age of forty-five years to hold the office held by him at the date of his retirement, having received all increments for which he would have been eligible until attaining that age in that office;

(iii)	the additional pension shall not be granted to a police officer who has been offered and has refused an alternative appointment to a post which, in the opinion of the appropriate authority is of not less value than the post from which the police officer is required to retire; and

(iv)	the additional pension shall not be granted to any police officer who is required to retire for the reason set out in paragraph (c).

(3)	A police officer who after completing 10 years’ pensionable service is required to retire—

(a)	on medical grounds occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect; or

(b)	on grounds of incompetence or inefficiency, whether or not beyond his control,

may be granted such pension as the Minister may, on the recommendation of the appropriate authority, consider just and proper,

Police Regulations

not exceeding the pension to which such police officer would have been entitled were he required to retire under subregulation (1).

(4)	Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of these Regulations, the Minister may, in special circumstances, award to a police officer who leaves the public service without being entitled to a pension, such pension or gratuity as he may deem appropriate in all the circumstances.

184.—(1) Except as otherwise specified in this regulation, the rate of pension granted to a police officer under regulation 183 shall be an annual amount equal to the total of—

(a)	one-seven hundred and twentieth of his pensionable salary for each completed month of pensionable service up to and including 31st December, 1945;

(b)	one-six hundredth of his pensionable salary for each completed month of pensionable service after 31st December, 1945; and

(c)	20 per cent, of the amount calculated under paragraph (a) subject to a maximum of twenty pounds (£20),

and shall be paid in monthly or quarterly instalments.

(2)	Where a pension is computed partly at the rate of one-seven hundred and twentieth and partly at the rate of one-six hundredth for each month of pensionable service, and in each part there occurs a period of service not amounting to one complete month, then if the two incomplete periods of a month amount in aggregate to not less than thirty days, one month’s service shall be added to the part in which the greater period of pensionable service occurs and where the two periods are equal to the part to which the one-six hundredth pension rate applies.

(3)	Notwithstanding the provisions of this regulation, a pension granted to a police officer under this regulation shall not exceed two-thirds of the highest salary drawn by him at any time during the course of his qualifying service.

(4)	The rate of any pension payable under these Regulations shall be—

(a)	as specified in regulation 183 or regulation 184, as the case may be; or

(b)	one pound (£1) per month; whichever is the greater:

Provided that the provisions of subparagraph (b) shall not apply to any pension granted after the 15th January, 1968, if the rate of that pension is reduced to a sum less than one pound (£1) per month by reason of the exercise of an option made under regulation 187.

Police Regulations

185.	In this Part pensionable service means the total of the following periods—

(«) qualifying service since 1st July, 1965, in a pensionable post;

(b)	qualifying service between 1st July, 1964 and 30th June, 1965 as a permanent officer in a pensionable post whether or not the police officer exercised his right to elect not to continue on pensionable conditions during that period;

(c)	qualifying service prior to 1st July, 1964, in a post during any period when that post was a pensionable post under any regulations in force at that period;

(d)	qualifying service in any post prior to 1st January, 1964 on a salary, including ration and efficiency allowances if applicable, of thirty pounds (£30) per annum or more;

(e)	half of the qualifying service of the officer in any post other than a pensionable post if such service was immediately followed by service specified in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c), subject to a maximum of five years.

186.	—(1) In this Part, pensionable salary means—

(a)	in the case of a police officer who—

(i)	has held the same post; or

(ii)	has held different posts carrying the same fixed salary or salary scale segment during the three years of his qualifying service immediately preceding the date of his retirement,

the annual rate of salary payable to him on the date of his retirement;

(b)	in the case of any other police officer, one-third of the total salary, received by him during the 3 years of his qualifying service immediately preceding the date of his retirement:

Provided that—

(i)	if such one-third is less than the highest annual salary received by such police officer at the date of any appointment within such period of three years, that salary shall be taken as pensionable salary; and

(ii)	if such one-third is less than the annual salary which such police officer would have enjoyed at the date of his retirement had he continued to hold any office from which he was appointed at any time during such period of three years and received all increments which, in the opinion of the appropriate authority, would have been granted to him, the annual salary which he would have enjoyed shall be taken as pensionable salary.

Police Regulations

(2) For the purpose of determining under subregulation (1) (b) the salary that a police officer received or would have enjoyed, he shall be deemed to have enjoyed the benefit of any increase due to revision of salaries applicable to any post held by him as if such increase had been payable throughout such period of three years.

187.	—(1) A police officer who is eligible for a pension under regulation 183 may opt to be granted a reduced pension at the rate of three fourths or any greater fraction of the pension for which he is eligible, together with a lump sum equal to twelve and a half times the amount of the reduction so made in his annual pension. Such option shall be made in writing, addressed to the Accountant General, and delivered before the day immediately preceding the date of the officer’s retirement.

(2)	An option made under subreguiation (1) may be revoked or replaced by a different option in the manner and within the period allowed in subregulation (1).

(3)	If a police officer who is entitled to but has not exercised an option under this regulation dies after he finally retires but before a pension is granted under this Part, the Minister may, on the request of the personal representative, heir or dependant of the deceased, grant a lump sum and reduced pension within the limits allowed in subregulation (1).

188.	—(1) Where a police officer to whom a pension has been granted under this Part is subsequently appointed permanently to another post in the public service, the payment of his pension may, with his consent, be suspended during the period of such re-employment.

(2) Notwith. .anding the provisions of regulation 178 (2), a police officer whose pension is suspended under subregulation (1) may be granted on final retirement the pension for which he would otherwise have qualified if no break in service immediately prior to his re-employment had occurred, and such pension shall be in place of, but not less than, any pension previously granted to him by the Government.

189.	—(1) A pension shall cease to be payable on the happening of any of the following events—

(a)	if the pensioner is adjudicated bankrupt or declared insolvent by a court of competent jurisdiction in any part of the world;

(b)	if the pensioner is sentenced, by a court of competent jurisdiction in any part of the world, to imprisonment without option of a fine for a period exceeding one month:

Provided that except for payments made under subregulation (2), the pension shall be restored with retrospective effect should

[Subsidiary]

Eligibility to gratuity

Cap. 22:03 22:02

Police Regulations

the pensioner be acquitted on appeal or at any time receive a free pardon;

(c)	if the pensioner attempts to assign or transfer the pension or part thereof, or if any person attempts to attach, sequester or levy upon the pension or any part thereof except for the purpose permitted under regulation 181, or upon the happening of any event whereby the pensioner would be deprived of the right to receive the pension or any part thereof; and

(d)	on the death of the pensioner.

(2)	Where a pension ceases under the provisions of subregulation (1) otherwise than on the death of the pensioner the pension shall be held upon trust for the maintenance or support, or otherwise for the benefit, of all or any one or more exclusively of the other or others of the following persons—

(a)	the pensioner and his wife or husband, if any, and his children or more remote issue, if any; or

(b)	if there is no wife or husband or issue of the pensioner in existence, the pensioner and such persons who would, if he were actually dead, be entitled to his estate, as the Minister may, in his absolute discretion, determine.

(3)	Upon a pensioner obtaining unconditional discharge from bankruptcy or insolvency by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Minister may direct that the payment of his pension to him be resumed.

190.—(1) A police officer who is not eligible for a pension under regulation 183, against whom no disciplinary proceedings are being taken and who—

(a)	after completing 7 years’ qualifying service is required to retire—

(i)	on medical grounds not occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect; or

(ii)	in the public interest; or

(b)	after completing 3 years’ qualifying service is permitted, by the Minister to resign in order to assume duties under the Chiefs Act or under the Local Government (District Councils) Act;

shall be granted a gratuity calculated in accordance with regulation 191.

(2) A police officer who, after completing 7 years’ qualifying service, is required to retire—

(a) on medical grounds occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect; or

LAWS OF MALAWI

Constitution

Police Regulations

(,b) on grounds of incompetence or inefficiency, whether

or not beyond his control,

may, if he is not granted a pension under regulation 183 (3), be granted such gratuity as the Minister may, on the recommendation of the appropriate authority, consider just and proper, but in no case exceeding the gratuity to which such police officer would have been entitled were he required to retire under subregulation (1).

(3)	Subject to the provisions of subregulation (6) where any police officer against whom no disciplinary proceedings are being taken and who has completed 5 years’ qualifying service dies while in the employment of Government, the Minister may grant to his personal representative, heirs or dependants a gratuity calculated in accordance with regulation 191:

Provided that such gratuity shall not amount to less than one year’s salary.

(4)	Subject to the provisions of subregulation (7), where any officer dies as a result of injury sustained in the actual discharge of his duty and not occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect, and such injury is specifically attributable to the nature of his duty, the Minister may grant to his personal representative, heirs or dependants a gratuity calculated in accordance with regulation 191:

Provided that such gratuity shall not amount to less than one year’s salary.

(5)	Subject to the provisions of subregulatiofl (6), where any officer is permanently injured in the actual discharge of his duties by some injury specifically attributable to the nature of his duty and not occasioned by his own impropriety or neglect, and his retirement is thereby necessitated or materially accelerated, the Minister may grant to him such compassionate allowance as he may deem fit. If any other terminal benefit is payable under this Part, such allowance shall be in addition to any such terminal benefit.

(6)	Where a gratuity may be payable under subregulation

(4), (5) or (6), it shall not be payable if the Workmen’s Compensation Act applies and—

(a)	in respect of subregulation (4) and (5), compensation in

respect of death is awarded to the officer’s dependants; or

(b)	in respect of subregulation (6) the officer elects to proceed

under this Act.

(7)	Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of these Regulations, the Minister may, in his discretion, grant to an officer who leaves the Force without being entitled to a pension or

113

[Subsidiary]

Cap. 55:03

L.R.0.111971

[Subsidiary]

Amount of gratuity

Service on 1st January 1951

Transferred police officers— interpretation and application

’ Police Regulations

gratuity or to an employee who leaves the Force without being entitled to a pension or gratuity or to an employee who leaves the Force without being entitled to a gratuity, such gratuity as he deems appropriate in all the circumstances.

191.—(1) Except where otherwise specified in that regulation, the amount of gratuity granted to a police officer under regulation 190. shall be an amount equal to the monthly rate of salary which the officer was earning immediately prior to the termination of his appointment, multiplied by the number of completed years’ qualifying service performed by him:

Provided that a police officer whose qualifying service comes within the number of years shown in Column 1 below shall be limited to a gratuity not exceeding the sum shown opposite such number of years in Column 2 below, as follows—

Column 1

Column 2

Length of Service Not over 20 years

Over 20 years but not over 30 years Over 30 years

Maximum Gratuity 12 months’ salary 15 months’ salary 18 months’ salary

(2) Any gratuity paid in accordance with this regulation may, at the discretion of the appropriate authority, be paid in a lump sum or in weekly, monthly or annual instalments. Should any balance remain unpaid at the time of the officer’s death, such balance shall be paid to his personal representative, heirs or dependants.

192.	A police officer who was serving in the Force on 1st January, 1951 and who retires after that date in circumstances in which he would have been eligible for a gratuity on such retirement under the Police Gratuities Rules, 1948 (had they not been revoked) may receive on his retirement the gratuity calculated in accordance with the said Police Gratuities Rules although he has not qualified for a gratuity under these Regulations. If he retires as aforesaid in circumstances entitling him to a gratuity under these Regulations, he may receive on such retirement a gratuity calculated in accordance with the said Police Gratuities Rules or in accordance with these Regulations, whichever may be to his better advantage.

193.—(1) In this regulation, and the following two regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—

“other police service” means service in a police capacity under a scheduled government and any other service in a police capacity as the Minister may determine;

Police Regulations

“pensionable police officer” means any police officer who immediately prior to the termination of his police service held a post which, under the law or regulation of the service in which he was last employed, was a pensionable post;

“scheduled government” means any of the following governments, organizations, authorities or services—

(a)	Government of Kenya

(b)	Government of Tanzania

(c)	Government of Zambia

(d)	Government of Uganda

(e)	East African Common Services Organization (/) Unified African Teaching Service

(g)	Executive Officer, Soche Authority

(h)	Government of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (0 A chief, under the Chiefs Act

O’) The Traditional Courts Service under the Traditional Courts Act

(k) A District Council under the Local Government (District Councils) Act;

“service in the group” means service in the Force and the police force of any scheduled government or any other government which the Minister may in his discretion treat for the purposes of calculating any officer’s entitlement under this Part as a scheduled government.

(2) This regulation and the following two regulations shall apply only in the case of a pensionable officer transferred to or from service in the Force or to any other police force'.

194.—(1) Where a pensionable police officer has performed other police service which—

(a)	was wholly under one or more scheduled governments;

(b)	was partially under one or more scheduled governments;

or

(c)	did not include service in any scheduled government, and the aggregate of his service in the Force and other police service would have qualified him had it been wholly in the Force, for a pension under this Part,

he may on his retirement from police service in circumstances in which he is permitted by the law or regulation of the force in which he was last employed to retire on pension or gratuity, be granted by the Minister in respect of his service in the Force a pension of such amount as will bear the same proportion to the amount of pension for which he would have been eligible in respect of his service in the group had such service been wholly

115

[Subsidiary]

Cap. 22:03 Cap. 3:03

Cap. 22:02

Pension

L.R.0.111971

[Subsidiary]

Gratuity

Police Regulations

in the Force, as the aggregate amount of his salary during his pensionable service in the Force shall bear to the aggregate amount of his salary throughout his service in the group.

(2)	In calculating for the purpose of this regulation the pension for which a police officer would have been eligible had his service in the group been wholly in the Force, all the provisions of this Part shall apply except that—

(a)	where he was not serving in a scheduled government at the date of retirement from police service, the date upon which he was last transferred from the service of a scheduled government shall be deemed to be the date of his retirement for the purposes of determining his pensionable salary under regulation 186;

(b)	no regard shall be given to any additional pension granted under regulation 183 (2) (e);

(c)	no period of service in a scheduled government in respect of which no pension or gratuity is granted by that government shall be taken into account.

(3)	In calculating for the purpose of this regulation the aggregate amount of a police officer’s salary during his pensionable service in the Malawi Government, where under regulation 185 (d) half of any qualifying service in a non-pensionable post is taken into account as pensionable service, one half only of the officer’s aggregate salary during any such pensionable service allowed under regulation 185 (d) shall be taken into account.

(4)	In calculating for the purpose of this regulation the aggregate amount of an officer’s salary throughout his service in the group, .no regard shall be given to any salary for service under a scheduled government in respect of which no pension or gratuity is granted by the Government.

195.	Where a pensionable officer retires from a police force in the group in circumstances in which he is permitted by the law or regulation of the force in which he is last employed to retire on pension or gratuity, but he has not performed 10 years’ pensionable service in the group, he may be granted by the Minister in respect of his service in the Force a gratuity not exceeding five times the annual amount of the pension which might otherwise have been granted to him under regulation 194.