<pre>
 Chad
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF CHAD'
 April 16, 1962
 PREAMBLE
 The people of Chad solemnly proclaims its attachment to the principles
 of democracy as defined by the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
 Citizen in 1789, by the Universal Declaration of 1948, and as guaranteed
 by the present Constitution.
 It affirms its willingness to co-operate in peace and friendship with all
 peoples who share its ideal of justice, liberty, equality, fraternity and
 human solidarity.
 The fundamental principles of the constitutional organization of the
 Republic of Chad are:
 The defense of the rights of man and of the public liberties in the name
 of one ideal of universal justice;
 The establishment of a democracy, based on the system of separation
 of powers: legislative, executive and judicial, and on the principle of
 government of the people, by the people and for the people;
 The ensuring of the rights of the citizen, based on the principles of
 liberty, humanity and equality.
 The Republic of Chad, secular, democratic and social, declares that:
 Noone may be arrested or detained except in accordance with the law
 or by order of the legitimate authority;
 The domicile of anyone inhabiting the territory of the Republic is
 inviolable; entry is permissible only in accordance with the forms of and
 in the cases provided by law;
 The oppression of one section of the people by another is unconsti-
 tutional;
 Any manifestation or propaganda of an ethnic character shall be
 punished by law;
 Citizens have the right to associate, petition and to express freely their
 1 Loi Con8titutionnelle No. 2/62 du 16 avril 1962, published by the Mini9tare de l'In-
 formation et du Tourisme. Direction de l'Information. Translated by the Editor.
 
 65
 
 
 opinions; the exercise of these rights shall be limited only by the liberty
 of others and by public security;
 The press is free whatever its manner of expression. The conditions
 within which freedom of the press may be exercised shall be determined
 by law;
 Public education is secular; it shall be given in the French language;
 a special position shall be accorded to the Arabic language. The education
 given in all the establishments of the Republic shall be free;
 All citizens have an equal right of access to all public offices;
 Any distinction of birth, class or caste is abolished;
 The right to work and to assistance for the family is guaranteed within
 the framework of the social laws; the same applies to freedom of work;
 Citizens are equal in respect of taxes; they shall contribute to the public
 expenses according to their abilities.
 The preceding provisions are an integral part of this Constitution.
 TITLE I
 THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. Chad is a sovereign Republic, one and indivisible; it shall
 recognize the existence of the territorial units established by law; it
 shall ensure the equality of all its citizens before the law; it shall affirm the
 separation of religion and the State.
 The national emblem is the tricolor flag, blue, gold and red in vertical
 bands.
 The National Anthem is the " Tchadienne."
 The motto of the Republic is "Unity, Work, Progress."
 The official language is French.
 Art. 2. Sovereignty belongs to the people who shall exercise it, either
 directly by means of referendum, or indirectly through its representatives.
 Conditions for the recourse to referendum shall be determined by law.
 The representatives of the people shall be appointed by universal, equal
 and secret vote.
 All Chadian nationals of both sexes who enjoy civil and political rights
 may vote under conditions to be determined by law.
 No section of the people nor any individual may usurp the exercise
 of sovereignty.
 Art. 3. The rights of the citizen shall be guaranteed by the Constitution.
 They shall be indefeasible, inviolable and shall rest upon the fundamental
 principles set forth in the Preamble to the Constitution.
 The Republic shall ensure equality of all citizens before the law without
 distinction of origin or of religion.
 Art. 4. Citizens shall be free to form parties or political groups which
 
 66
 
 Chad
 
 
 shall be instrumental in the expression of the suffrage. These parties and
 groups shall be formed and shall carry on their activities freely within
 the limits established by the laws and. regulations. They must respect
 the principles of national sovereignty and the laws of the Republic.
 TITLE II
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC,
 HEAD OF THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 5. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State
 and of the Government. He shall determine and conduct the policy of the
 nation.
 He shall be the exclusive holder of the executive power. He shall uphold
 respect for the Constitution: he shall ensure by his arbitration the regular
 functioning of the public services as well as the continuance of the State.
 He shall be the guarantor of national independence, of the integrity
 of the territory of the Republic, of respect for international treaties and
 conventions and agreements.
 Art. 6. The President of the Republic shall be elected for seven years
 by an electoral college comprising:
 Members of the National Assembly;
 Mayors and Municipal Counselors;
 Mayors and Councillors of the rural communities;
 Chiefs of the customary communities within the conditions set forth
 by law.
 The outgoing President shall be eligible for reelection; he shall remain
 in full exercise of his powers until the investiture of his successor which
 shall take place immediately following his election.
 The office of the President of the Republic shall be incompatible with
 the exercise of any public employment and of any remunerated private
 activity.
 Art. 7. The electoral college shall be convened by decree of the Council
 of Ministers ten days at the least or sixty days at the most after the
 expiration of the mandate of the incumbent President of the Republic.
 Election of the President of the Republic shall be by a two thirds
 majority in the first ballot. If this is not obtained, he shall be elected by
 absolute majority on the second ballot or in the event of a further ballot,
 by relative majority.
 Candidates for the office of President of the Republic must enjoy civil
 and political rights.
 Before assuming office, the President of the Republic shall take before
 the Parliament the following oath:
 "I swear and promise faithfully to fulfil my office in the overriding
 
 Chad
 
 67
 
 
 interest of the country, to respect the Constitution and to defend it in all
 circumstances."
 Art. 8. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council
 of Ministers. Immediately after his election he shall appoint the members
 of the Government and determine their powers; he shall then present his
 Government to the National Assembly.
 He may by a decree taken within the Council of Ministers terminate
 the functions of members of the Government and replace them.
 The decree terminating the functions of a minister and appointing
 his successor shall be communicated to the National Assembly.
 Ministers shall be responsible to the President of the Republic.
 Art. 9. If the President of the Republic is temporarily unable to
 exercise his duties, for whatever reason, and during the period between
 the end of his term and the appointment of his successor, his powers
 shall be exercised by a member of the Government appointed by the Coun-
 cil of Ministers.
 If the Presidency of the Republic falls vacant by reason of the expiration
 of the term of office, by death or by definitive impediment, election of a
 new President shall take place.
 A definitive impediment to the Presidency of the Republic shall be
 declared by vote of a two-thirds majority of the members of the National
 Assembly upon the advice of the Supreme Court.
 Art. 10. The Council of Ministers must be informed of:
 decisions affecting the general policy of the State;
 bills;
 ordinances;
 decrees other than those excepted by the Constitution or the laws;
 appointment to the higher offices of State, as set forth in a list enacted
 by law.
 Art. 11. The President of the Republic may submit to a referendum
 any bill which seems to him to require direct consultation with the people.
 When the referendum decides in favor of the bill, the President shall
 promulgate it within the time limit stipulated in Article 55, paragraph 3,
 below.
 Any law contrary to the will of the people as expressed by referendum
 shall be null and void.
 Art. 12. The President of the Republic shall sign ordinances and decrees
 whether or not discussed in the Council of Ministers;
 he shall have regulatory power;
 he shall ensure the implementation of the laws he promulgates;
 he shall be the head of the administration and shall make the civil and
 military appointments of the State. The law shall determine the
 conditions under which the power of appointment granted to the
 President of the Republic may be delegated by him.
 
 68
 
 Chad
 
 
 Art. 13. He shall be Commander of the Armed Forces.
 He shall accredit Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign
 powers; foreign Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary shall be ac-
 credited to him.
 Art. 14. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence
 of the nation, the integrity of its territory or the fulfilment of its inter-
 national commitments are threatened by a clear and present danger,
 or when the regular functioning of the constitutional governmental
 authorities is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall, in the
 Council of Ministers and after consultation with the Presidents of the
 National Assembly and of the Supreme Court, take such measures as the
 circumstances require.
 He shall inform the nation of these measures in a message.
 Art. 15. The President of the Republic, in the Council of Ministers shall
 decree martial law or siege law.
 Art. 16. The acts of the President of the Republic, other than those
 provided for under Articles 8 (paragraph 1), 11, 14 (paragraph 2), 45,
 51 and 65 of this Constitution, shall be countersigned, should circumstances
 so require, by the responsible ministers.
 Art. 17. Bills, ordinances and decrees may, before being submitted to
 the Council of Ministers, be examined by the Supreme Court for an opinion.
 Art. 18. The President of the Republic may delegate certain of his
 powers to members of the Government.
 Art. 19. The powers of the President of the Republic with respect to the
 National Assembly shall be as stipulated in Articles 33 and 55 of this
 Constitution.
 TITLE III
 THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Art. 20. The Parliament shall comprise a single Assembly, called the
 "National Assembly," whose members shall bear the title of deputies.
 Art. 21. The National Assembly shall pass the laws and approve
 taxation; it shall take part in the election of the President of the Republic
 and supervise the activities of the Government in accordance with the
 procedures laid down in Articles 33 and 55 of this Constitution. It shall
 authorise the declaration of war.
 Art. 22. Deputies shall be elected by universal direct suffrage from a
 national list.
 The term of the legislature shall be five years.
 A law shall determine the number and the method of election of deputies
 as well as the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices
 incompatible with membership in the Assembly. The conditions under
 
 Ohad
 
 69
 
 
 which new elections shall be organized when the seats of deputies become
 vacant shall also be determined by law.
 Art. 23. The National Assembly shall pronounce on the validity of the
 elections of its members. In cases of dispute, the Supreme Court, at the
 request of a candidate, shall rule on the eligibility of deputies and the
 regularity of their election.
 Art. 24. The Assembly shall convene by right on the first working day
 after the fifteenth day after its election; this date may, however, be put
 forward at the request of a majority of the deputies; its agenda shall
 automatically include the appointment of its officers.
 The National Assembly shall convene by right in two ordinary sessions
 a year.
 Except where earlier closure is decided by vote of a majority of the
 members of the National Assembly, the ordinary session shall automatic-
 ally close forty five days after the opening of the first meeting.
 The first session shall begin on the first Tuesday of April, the second
 session, called the budgetary session, shall begin on the last Tuesday of
 October.
 Opening of the session shall be postponed to the following day if the day
 stipulated is a holiday.
 Art. 25. The National Assembly may be convened in extraordinary
 session by the President of the Republic; an extraordinary session may
 also be convened by the President of the Assembly upon written request
 by a majority of its members.
 The agenda of extraordinary sessions shall be limited and defined in the
 act of convocation.
 The extraordinary session shall end as soon as the agenda has been
 exhausted and at the latest fifteen days from the date of its meeting.
 Only the President of the Republic may ask for a new session before
 the end of the month following the closure of the preceding session.
 Art. 26. The President of the Assembly shall be elected for the duration
 of the legislature; his term of office may, however, be ended upon the
 written request of twenty deputies approved by vote of a majority of two
 thirds of the members of the National Assembly. The Secretariat of the
 Assembly shall be elected for one year. It is eligible for reelection.
 Art. 27. Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. A full
 transcript of the debates shall be published.
 The Assembly may decide to sit in secret committee at the request of
 the President of the Republic or of a quarter of its members.
 Art. 28. Whatever his regional origin, each deputy shall represent the
 whole nation.
 All binding instructions upon deputies shall be null and void.
 A deputy's right to vote shall be personal; delegation of the vote shall,
 however, be permitted when a deputy is absent because of illness, or in
 
 Chad
 
 70
 
 
 order to carry out a mission entrusted to him by the Government, at the
 request of the Assembly, or in order to fulfil his military obligations.
 Not more than one vote on a ballot may be delegated to any one
 deputy.
 Art. 29. No deputy may be prosecuted, investigated, arrested, detained
 or tried because of his opinions and votes during a plenary session of the
 Assembly or in committee.
 Art. 30. No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for
 criminal or minor offences without the authorization of the Assembly,
 except in flagrante delicto.
 When the Assembly is not in session, no deputy may be arrested without
 the authorization of the secretariat of the Assembly, except in flagrante
 delicto, in cases of authorized prosecution or of final conviction.
 Art. 31. Deputies shall receive an emolument the amount of which shall
 be fixed by a law.
 Art. 32. The National Assembly shall draw up its rules of procedure.
 TITLE IV
 LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY POWERS
 Art. 33. A law is the deliberation of the Assembly duly promulgated.
 Laws that the Constitution characterizes as organic are those delibe-
 rations which have been voted by a majority of two thirds of the National
 Assembly and duly promulgated after the Supreme Court has declared
 them to be constitutional.
 The President of the Republic and the deputies alike shall have the
 right to initiate legislation. In the former case the legislation shall be
 submitted to the Assembly under the name of "Government bill"; in the
 latter case, under the name of "Parliamentary bill." Government bills
 shall be discussed in the Council of Ministers and filed with the Secretariat
 of the National Assembly.
 Both the Government and members of the National Assembly have
 the right of amendment.
 Art. 34. Ordinances are acts signed by the President of the Republic
 in the Council of Ministers under the conditions stipulated for laws between
 sessions and in the cases provided for in Articles 38 and 54 of this Consti-
 tution. They shall come into force upon their publication. Except as
 provided in Article 38 below, they shall be submitted to ratification by
 the National Assembly at its first session following signature of the ordi-
 nance, and shall become null and void if the bill for their ratification is not
 submitted to the National Assembly at least eight days before the end
 of the session.
 An ordinance which has not been declared null and void may be modi-
 
 Ohad
 
 71
 
 
 fied only by law or by ordinance in those matters which are within the
 legislative domain.
 Art. 35. A plain decree is an act signed by the President of the Republic
 countersigned by the interested ministers should the circumstances so
 require.
 A decree in Council of Ministers is an act signed by the President of the
 Republic upon the advice of the Council of Ministers; it shall be counter-
 signed by the interested ministers should the circumstances so require.
 A decree that the law characterizes as organic is an act signed by the
 President of the Republic upon advice of the Council of Ministers and of
 the Supreme Court. It shall be countersigned by the interested ministers
 should the circumstances so require.
 An order is an act signed by a member of the Government within the
 realm of his powers and for the execution of a law or decree.
 A decision is an act signed, within the realm of his powers, by an
 official so authorized by law or ordinance.
 Art. 36. Laws shall establish the fundamental regulations regarding:
 - citizenship, civil rights and fundamental guarantees granted to the
 citizens for the exercise of their public liberties, the obligations imposed
 by the national defense upon the persons and property of citizens;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, the system of property,
 marriage contracts, inheritance and gifts;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefor, criminal procedure, amnesty;
 - the organization of the courts, the status of magistrates;
 - civil procedure;
 - the basis, the rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all kinds, the
 issuance of currency;
 - the system of property and property rights;
 - the electoral system for the National Assembly and the local assemblies;
 - the fundamental guarantees granted to civil personnel employed
 by the State and the general statute for the civil service;
 - the establishment categories of public institutions;
 - the general organization of the administration and of national defense;
 - the free administration of territorial units, the extent of their juris-
 diction and their resources;
 - education;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security;
 - the sale and the administration of State property;
 - internal river and air navigation;
 - investment and savings;
 - the organization of production;
 - the prison regime;
 - the resources and obligations of the State.
 
 72
 
 Chad
 
 
 Art. 37. Regulatory measures concerning matters stipulated in Article
 36 above, taken in order to implement a law, shall take the form either
 of organic decrees if the laws in question so state, or of decrees taken in
 Council of Ministers.
 Art. 38. The resources and obligations of the State shall be determined
 by the National Assembly by financial laws passed under the conditions
 stipulated by an organic law. The same shall apply to laws pertaining to
 national planning which determine the objectives of economic and social
 action of the Republic.
 The Government shall file the finance bill with the National Assembly
 at the latest on the eve of the opening of the budgetary session. The finance
 bill shall provide for revenue sufficient wholly to cover expenditures.
 Should the Assembly fail to reach a decision before the end of the ses-
 sion, the provisions of the finance bill may be enforced by ordinance.
 If the Assembly modifies the bill in such a manner that revenues do
 not balance expenditure, the Government, by decree, shall reduce the
 credits or shall create new revenues to the necessary amount. This
 ordinance must be submitted to ratification by the Assembly if the ordinary
 session has not yet been adjourned. In case of adjournment, the ordinance
 shall be submitted for ratification to the next ordinary session of the
 Assembly; if ratification of the ordinance has been placed before the
 Assembly and the Assembly has not voted the budget in balance, either
 at the end of the budgetary session or at the end of the following ordinary
 session, the budget shall be definitively established by an ordinance which
 shall not be subject to ratification.
 Should the finance bill not be filed by the Government within the
 conditions and time limits stipulated in the second paragraph of this
 article and, therefore, not be passed before the adjournment of the session,
 the President of the Republic shall request the National Assembly, in
 accordance with the emergency procedure provided in Article 54 below,
 to extend the fiscal regulations presently in force; he shall make available
 by decree in Council of Ministers and in the form of provisional monthly
 credits, the funds needed to meet the Government commitments already
 voted.
 The ordinary session shall than be extended by an extraordinary
 session, the duration of which shall not be longer than the delay by the
 Government in filing the finance bill. If, at the expiration of the extra-
 ordinary session the budget has not been adopted in balance, the procedure
 provided in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this article shall apply.
 Art. 39. Bills and amendments introduced by deputies shall not be
 considered when their adoption would result either in a diminution of
 public financial resources or in the creation or increase of public
 expenditures, unless accompanied by a bill for an increase of public
 revenues or for equivalent savings.
 
 Chad
 
 73
 
 
 Art. 40. Bills or amendments which are not within the domain of law
 shall be inadmissible. Inadmissibility shall be declared by the President
 of the National Assembly.
 In case of disagreement, the Supreme Court, upon the request of the
 President of the Republic or of the President of the National Assembly,
 shall rule within a time limit of eight days.
 Art. 41. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character and shall take the form of decrees,
 orders or decisions.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters passed prior to the entry
 into force of the present Constitution may be modified by organic decrees.
 TITLE V
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ASSEMBLY
 AND THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 42. The mutual relations of the Assembly and of the Government
 shall be expressed by:
 the motion of censure;
 the question of confidence;
 the procedure of emergency discussion;
 the second reading;
 the termination of the functions of members of the Government;
 the dissolution of the Assembly;
 the prorogation of the powers of the Assembly.
 Art. 43. The National Assembly may question the responsibility of the
 Government by the vote of a motion of censure; such a motion must be
 signed by one third of the members of the Assembly and approved by a
 majority of two thirds.
 If the motion of censure is rejected, its signatories may not introduce
 another motion of censure in the course of the same session.
 Art. 44. The President of the Republic may, after deliberation in the
 Council of Ministers, introduce the question of confidence with regard
 to a declaration of general policy or to a vote on a bill.
 Confidence of the Assembly in the Government shall be deemed denied
 if the text presented does not:
 receive two thirds of the votes of the members of the National Assembly
 in the case of a bill for an organic law;
 receive an absolute majority of the votes of members of the National
 Assembly in the case of a declaration of general policy or a bill.
 Art. 45. When confidence has been denied or the motion of censure
 voted in accordance with the majority provided in the Constitution the
 President of the Republic must, within a period of three days:
 
 Chad
 
 74
 
 
 either dissolve the Assembly;
 or submit the resignation of the Government.
 Art. 46. Members of the Government whose functions have been
 terminated by decree of the President of the Republic, shall ensure the
 despatch of current business pending the appointment of their successors.
 The President of the Republic shall present the members of the Govern-
 ment to the National Assembly within twenty four hours of their appoint-
 ment.
 Art. 47. Dissolution of the Assembly shall be declared in the Council
 of Ministers by the President of the Republic after consultation with the
 President of the National Assembly; the latter shall by right become a
 Minister of State.
 The election of a new National Assembly shall take place at least thirty
 and at most sixty days after the dissolution; the electoral college shall be
 convoked by decree taken in the Council of Ministers.
 Art. 48. Closure of an ordinary or extraordinary session shall by right
 be delayed for four days, should the occasion arise, in order to permit
 the application of the provisions of Articles 48 to 46 of this Constitution.
 Art. 49. In addition to the stipulations of Article 48 above, the President
 of the Republic may prolong the Assembly at the end of its legislative
 term, after consultation with its President, for a period amounting at the
 most to eighteen months.
 Art. 50. During the seven year term of the President of the Republic,
 the National Assembly may not be dissolved more than three times.
 The President of the Republic may not, during the last six months
 of his term, dissolve the National Assembly.
 Art. 51. The President of the Republic shall have access to the Assembly.
 He shall also communicate with the Assembly by messages. Interventions
 and messages of the President of the Republic shall not be followed by any
 debate. Between sessions, the Assembly shall be convened especially for
 this purpose.
 Upon the opening of the first ordinary session of the National Assembly,
 the President of the Republic shall describe, directly or by message, the
 state of the Nation.
 The President of the Republic may entrust a minister with representing
 the Government before the Assembly, who may be assisted during the
 debates or in committee by other ministers or by experts chosen by
 him.
 Ministers shall be heard in committee; they may be assisted by experts
 chosen by them.
 Art. 52. After the opening of the debate of the National Assembly,
 the Government may oppose the examination of any amendment which
 has not previously been submitted to the competent committee.
 If the Government so requests, the National Assembly shall decide,
 
 Chad
 
 75
 
 
 by a single vote, on all or part of the text under discussion, retaining
 only the amendments proposed or accepted by the Government.
 Art. 53. Discussion of the bills filed or agreed upon by the Government
 shall have priority on the agenda of the National Assembly in the order
 set by the Government.
 One meeting a week shall be reserved by priority for questions asked
 by deputies and for answers by the Government.
 Art. 54. In cases of emergency recognized by the Council of Ministers,
 the National Assembly shall decide on bills within a period of ten days or,
 when financial bills are concerned, within a period of thirty days. If at
 the end of this period, there has been no vote, the bill shall be promulgated
 to the state by the President of the Republic as an ordinance.
 Art. 55. The President of the Republic shall, with the countersignature
 of the interested ministers should the occasion arise, promulgate the laws
 within fifteen days following the transmission to the Government of the
 finally adopted law. In cases of urgency declared by the National Assembly,
 this time limit shall be reduced to eight days.
 The President of the Republic may before the expiration of this time
 limit, ask the Assembly for a reconsideration of the law or of certain of
 its articles. This reconsideration may not be refused.
 He may also, before the expiration of this time limit, request that such
 reconsideration not take place before the next ordinary session following
 the session at which the text has been adopted. This request shall auto-
 matically be granted.
 At the second reading the decision shall be taken by a two thirds majority
 vote of the members of the National Assembly.
 Within this same time limit, the President of the Republic may submit
 the law to the Supreme Court for a ruling on its constitutionality.
 The time limit for promulgation shall be postponed until the outcome
 of the second reading by the National Assembly or until a ruling by the
 Supreme Court that the law conforms to the Constitution.
 If promulgation does not take place within the time limits and under
 the conditions stipulated above, it shall be carried out by the President
 of the National Assembly.
 TITLE VI
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 56. The territorial units of the State shall be established by law
 and created by decree.
 A law shall stipulate the fundamental principles of the free adminis-
 tration of the territorial units, of their powers and their resources.
 
 76
 
 Chad
 
 
 Chad
 
 TITLE VII
 THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
 Art. 57. The Economic and Social Council shall give its opinion on
 Government bills, ordinances and decrees as well as on Parliamentary
 bills submitted to it.
 Any plan, or any bill dealing with a plan, of an economic or social
 character shall be submitted to it for its advice.
 The President of the Republic may consult the Economic and Social
 Council on any problem of an economic or social character.
 The composition of the Economic and Social Council and its rules of
 procedure shall be determined by an organic law.
 TITLE VIII
 THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 58. Justice shall be rendered in the name of the people throughout
 the territory of the State.
 Art. 59. Judges shall be subject only to the authority of the law in the
 exercise of their duties.
 The President of the Republic shall be guarantor of their independence.
 He shall be assisted by the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 60. Judges shall be appointed by the President of the Republic
 upon proposals of the Minister of Justice and with the advice of the High
 Council of the Judiciary. Such judges shall have permanent tenure.
 Art. 62.1 The High Council of the Judiciary shall study proposals
 for pardon and shall transmit them with their opinions to the President
 of the Republic.
 The High Council of the Judiciary shall act as a disciplinary council
 for judges.
 Art. 63. Noone may be arbitrarily detained.
 Any arrested person shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been
 decided following a procedure which provides the guarantees necessary
 to his defense. The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty,
 shall ensure respect for this principle under the conditions stipulated by
 law.
 
 1 Art. 61 is missing in the original text.
 
 77
 
 
 Chad
 
 TITLE IX
 THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 64. A Supreme Court shall be instituted which shall rule on the
 constitutionality of laws and on the conformity of international agree-
 ments and commitments with the Constitution. It shall also exercise those
 powers granted to it by this Constitution.
 An organic law shall determine the other powers of the Supreme Court,
 which shall comprise three chambers, each composed of the President,
 two counsellors and the attorney general.
 The three chambers shall be:
 The judicial chamber;
 The administrative chamber;
 The financial chamber.
 Art. 65. The President and the attorney general of the Supreme Court
 shall be appointed for a term of five years by the President of the Republic
 after consultation with the President of the National Assembly.
 The Court shall include six counselors appointed in the same fashion.
 Their meeting shall constitute the plenary assembly of the members
 of the Supreme Court. This plenary assembly shall rule on the consti-
 tutionality of international undertakings, of laws and regulations; it
 shall constitute the High Council of the Judiciary; it shall rule on the
 definitive incapacity of the President of the Republic.
 The Court may co-opt counselors on special service and auditors;
 the conditions of their appointment and their powers shall be determined
 by an organic law.
 Art. 66. The office of President and member of the Supreme Court
 shall be incompatible with that of minister or member of the National
 Assembly. Other incompatibilities shall be determined by an organic law.
 Art. 67. Decisions of the Supreme Court may not be appealed to any
 jurisdiction whatsoever. They must be recognized by the Government
 authorities and by all administrative and judicial authorities. A provision
 declared unconstitutional by the Court may not be promulgated nor form
 part of an international agreement.
 These decisions shall be issued in a special publication.
 Art. 68. The Supreme Court, in addition to the powers conferred upon
 it by the Constitution and the organic laws, shall contribute to the for-
 mation of the High Court of Justice in accordance with the provisions
 of Articles 76 to 79 of this Constitution.
 
 78
 
 
 Chad
 
 TITLE X
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
 Art. 69. The President of the Republic shall negotiate, sign and ratify
 treaties and international agreements.
 Art. 70. Peace treaties or agreements relative to international organi-
 zation, treaties which modify provisions of a legislative nature, may be
 ratified only by a law.
 Art. 71. If the Supreme Court, the matter having been referred to it
 by the President of the Republic or by the President of the National
 Assembly, shall declare that an international commitment contains a
 clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify this com-
 mitment may be given only after amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 72. Treaties or agreements duly ratified shall, upon their publi-
 cation, have an authority superior to that of laws subject, for each
 agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
 TITLE XI
 AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
 Art. 73. The President of the Republic and deputies alike shall have the
 right to initiate amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 74. The principle of a constitutional amendment must be approved
 by a majority vote of three fourths of the members of the National
 Assembly.
 The text containing the amendment shall be submitted to referendum
 except where the bill in question has been approved by a majority of
 four fifths of the members of the Assembly.
 Art. 75. No amendment procedure may be undertaken or continued
 which affects the integrity of the territory.
 The republican form of government shall not be subject to amendment.
 TITLE XII
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 76. A High Court of Justice shall be established whenever it is
 decided to institute proceedings under the conditions stipulated in Article
 77 below. It shall be composed of the court and the jury.
 The Court shall be composed of the President and the members of the
 Supreme Court. The prosecution shall be undertaken by the attorney
 
 79
 
 
 general of that Court. The jury shall be composed of fifteen members,
 chosen from among the members of the electoral college stipulated in
 Article 6 above, in accordance with procedures which shall be determined
 by an organic law, which shall also determine the rules of procedure of the
 High Court.
 Art. 77. The High Court may not be called upon to try the President
 of the Republic for actions performed in the exercise of his office except
 in the case of high treason.
 The High Court shall be competent to try members of the Government
 for actions performed in the exercise of their office and deemed to be
 crimes or misdemeanors, as well as to try their accomplices in case of
 a conspiracy against the security of the State.
 Art. 78. The President of the Republic and members of the Government
 may be indicted only by vote in open balloting and by a majority of two
 thirds of the members of the National Assembly.
 Art. 79. The High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and
 misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties as they are
 established by the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed.
 TITLE XIII
 INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION AND
 CO-OPERATION
 Art. 80. The Republic of Chad may conclude agreements of association
 with other States.
 The Republic may create with other States intergovernmental organi-
 zations of co-ordination and free co-operation with a common adminis-
 tration.
 Art. 81. Such organizations may in particular, have the following
 objectives:
 Harmonization of monetary, economic and financial policy;
 Establishment of customs unions;
 Creation of joint assistance funds;
 Harmonization of foreign policy;
 Harmonization of development plans;
 Taking common measures to ensure national defense;
 Co-ordination of the judicial organization;
 Co-operation in questions of higher education;
 Harmonization of rules concerning the organization of the civil service
 and the right to work;
 Co-ordination of transportation, communications and telecommuni-
 cations.
 
 Chad
 
 80
 
 
 Chad
 
 TITLE XIV
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 82. The Chief of State shall, by an act countersigned by the
 ministers now in office, promulgate this Constitution within three days of
 its adoption by the National Assembly.
 Within thirty days of the promulgation of the Constitution, the electoral
 college stipulated in Article 6 above shall proceed to the election of the
 President of the Republic; it shall be convoked by decree taken in Council
 of Ministers.
 Art. 83. The President of the Republic shall be installed in office as
 soon as the result of the election provided in the above article has been
 proclaimed; he shall immediately appoint the members of the Government
 and define their powers; he shall present them to the National Assembly
 under the conditions stipulated in Article 8 of this Constitution.
 Art. 84. The term of office of members of the National Assembly elected
 on March 4, 1962, shall expire on March 4, 1967. The President and officers
 shall be reelected as soon as voting has taken place on this Constitution;
 members of committees shall be continued in office. The first ordinary
 session of the year 1962 of the National Assembly shall resume by right
 the day after the election of the President of the Republic.
 Art. 85. Until the Supreme Court provided for in Title IX, is set up,
 matters for which this Constitution requires the enactment of an organic
 law shall form the object of laws voted by a majority of two thirds of the
 members of the National Assembly; matters for which the law requires
 the enactment of an organic decree shall be regulated by decree taken in
 Council of Ministers.
 Art. 86. The established authorities of the Republic shall continue to
 exercise their functions and the institutions already in existence shall be
 continued until the establishment of new authorities and institutions.
 Art. 87. Legislation and regulations presently in force in Chad shall
 remain applicable, except where altered by new texts, insofar as they are
 not contrary to this Constitution.
 Art. 88. The provisions necessary for the application of this Constitution
 shall form the subject of laws voted by the National Assembly.
 Art. 89. This law shall be executed as the Constitution of the Republic
 of Chad.
 Done at Fort-Lamy, April 16, 1962
 
 81
 
 
</pre>
