<pre>
 CAMEROON
 SUMMARY
 INTERNATIONAL STATUS
 Cameroon is a member of the United Nations (September 20, 1960).
 It is a member of the Organization of African Unity and of other inter-
 national organizations.
 East Cameroon became independent on January 1, 1960. The Federal
 Republic of Cameroon was formed on October 1, 1961, when the southern
 part of West Cameroon, following a plebiscite held in February 1961,
 joined East Cameroon. In 1919, the territory was divided into East
 Cameroon, administered by France, and West Cameroon, administered by
 
 
 Great Britain, under mandate to the League of Nations. The area became
 a trust territory of the United Nations after the second World War,
 under the same administrations as formerly. The French Cameroons
 received internal autonomy by decree of April 16, 1957, and on November
 12, 1958, France requested the United Nations to grant them indepen-
 dence on January 1, 1960. The southern zone of the British Cameroons
 were administered as a separate region of Nigeria from 1953, and the
 northern zone, since 1920, as part of the northern region of Nigeria.
 Following the independence of the latter, the United Nations decided to
 hold a plebiscite to decide the future of the British Cameroons. The
 Southern Cameroons decided to join the Cameroon Republic and the
 Northern Cameroons to join Nigeria.
 The Cameroons (Rio dos Camaroes, river of prawns) were discovered
 at the end of the fifteenth century by the Portuguese navigator, Fernando
 Po. European trading stations were established on the coast during the
 seventeenth century, but the Dhala and other coastal tribes forbade
 strangers to go inland and themselves prospered with the trade. The
 coastal region had come under British influence by the end of the eight-
 eenth century and in 1837, the area around the estuary was made over to
 them by the king of Bimha. It was never formally annexed and Germany
 acquired the territory by a treaty of July 15, 1884, with King Bell. It
 remained a German colony until the first World War.
 FORM OF NATIONAL GOVERNMENT
 The Constitution of September 1, 1961, replacing that of March 4, 1960,
 declares the federal republic to be democratic, secular and social.1 The
 powers of the federal authority are enumerated.2
 SOURCE OF SOVEREIGN POWER
 Sovereignty is vested in the Cameroonian people.3
 RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE
 Article 1 states that all citizens are equal before the law and affirms
 adherence to the fundamental freedoms set out in the Universal Decla-
 ration of Human Rights and the United Nations Charter. Article 6 states
 that the "public liberties" fall within the powers of the Federal Authority.
 
 2 Id., Art. 5, 6, 24.    3 Id., Art. 2.
 
 32
 
 Cameroon
 
 1 Const., Art. 1.
 
 
 Cameroon
 
 LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
 The Federal National Assembly is unicameral. Deputies are elected
 for a term of five years by universal secret suffrage.' It holds two sessions
 annually not exceeding thirty days each.2
 EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT
 The President is elected for a term of five years and is eligible for
 reelection.3 He and the Vice-President may not be natives of the same
 Federated State; they are elected by direct vote and universal suffrage.4
 Ministers are appointed by the President and their office is incompatible
 with any State parliamentary mandate or any private or public employ-
 ment.5 Ministers have access to the Assembly.6 The President is the head
 of the armed forces, has the right of pardon, the power of appointment.7
 The President appoints the Prime Minister of each Federated State.8
 There is provision for an Economic and Social Council of the Federation.9
 JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
 The President is the guarantor of the independence of the judiciary.1o
 Judicial power is vested in the courts of each state and the Federal
 Court of Justice. The latter settles disputes of jurisdiction between courts
 of the states, between the states and the Federal Republic, acts as a court
 of appeal, and a court of administrative law." The President may refer
 any federal or state law he considers to be contrary to the Constitution
 to the Federal Court of Justice.12 Judges are appointed by the President
 with the advice of the Federal Council of the Magistracy.13
 There is a Federal High Court of Justice with jurisdiction over high
 officials of the Federation and of the States in cases of high treason or
 conspiracy against the security of the state.14
 AREA, POPULATION, ETC.
 The area is 474,000 square kilometres, the population (estimated 1962)
 4,326,000. The official languages are French and English 's and the
 capital is Yaound6.
 1 Id., Art. 16.  2 Id., Art. 19.   3 Id., Art. 10.  4 Id., Art. 9.
 5 Id., Art. 11.   6 Id., Art. 28.  7 Id., Art. 12.  8 Id., Art. 39.
 9 Id., Art. 37.  10 Id., Art. 32.  11 Id., Art. 33.  12 Id., Art. 14.
 13 Id., Art. 32.  14 Id., Art. 36.  15 Id., Art. 1.
 
 33
 
 
 Cameroon
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 FEDERAL REPUBLIC of CAMEROON'
 September 1, 1961
 TITLE I
 THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON
 Art. 1. The Federal Republic of Cameroon is formed, as from 1st
 October 1961, of the Territory of the Republic of Cameroun, henceforth
 called East Cameroon, and the Territory of the Southern Cameroon for-
 merly under United Kingdom administration, henceforth called West
 Cameroon.
 The Federal Republic of Cameroon is democratic, secular and social.
 It shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the law. It affirms its
 adherence to the fundamental freedoms set out in the Universal Decla-
 ration of Human Rights and the Charter of the United Nations.
 The official language of the Federal Republic of Cameroon shall be
 French and English.
 The national motto shall be: "Peace, Work, Fatherland."
 The national flag shall be: green, red and yellow, in three vertical bands
 of equal size, with two gold stars superimposed on the green band.
 The seat of the national institutions shall be Yaound6.
 The National Anthem of the Federation shall be:
 "0 Cameroon, Cradle of our Forefathers."
 The Seal of the Federal Republic of Cameroon shall be a circular
 medallion in bas-relief, forty-six millimetres in diameter, showing on the
 reverse, in its centre, the head of a girl in profile, facing to the dexter
 towards a branch of coffee-shrub bearing two leaves and adjoined on the
 sinister by five cocoa pods, the whole encircled by the words "Federal
 Republic of Cameroon" above and the national motto "Peace, Work,
 Fatherland" below.
 Nationals of the Federated States shall be citizens of the Federal
 Republic and shall possess Cameroonian nationality.
 1 Bilingual English-French text supplied by Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Yaound6.
 
 34
 
 
 Art. 2. National sovereignty shall be vested in the Cameroonian People,
 which shall exercise such sovereignty either through its deputies in the
 Federal Assembly or by way of referendum. No section of the People,
 nor any individual, may assume the exercise thereof. The vote shall be
 equal and secret; all citizens who have attained the age of twenty-one
 years shall participate therein.
 The authorities entrusted with the guidance of the State shall derive
 their Powers from the People through elections held on a basis of universal
 suffrage and direct or indirect ballot.
 Art. 3. The political parties and groups play a part in the expression
 of the suffrage. They shall be free to form and to carry on their activites
 within the limits established by law and regulations.
 They must respect the principles of democracy and national sovereignty.
 Art. 4. The federal authority shall be exercised by:
 The President of the Federal Republic;
 The Federal National Assembly.
 TITLE II
 THE POWERS OF THE FEDERAL AUTHORITIES
 Art. 5. The powers of the Federal Authorities shall embrace the follow-
 ing matters:
 Nationality;
 The status of aliens;
 Regulations concerning conflicts of laws;
 National defense;
 Foreign affairs;
 The internal and external security of the Federal State, emigration and
 immigration;
 Development planning, guidance of the economy, statistics, the control
 and organisation of credit, external economic relations (including trade
 agreements);
 The monetary system, the preparation of the Federal Budget and the
 establishment of taxes and revenue of all kinds to meet federal ex-
 penditure;
 Higher education and scientific research;
 Information services and radio;
 Foreign technical and financial assistance;
 Postal services and telecommunications;
 Aviation and meteorology, mining and geological research and the
 geographical cover of the national territory;
 Regulations governing the Federal Civil Service and the Judiciary;
 The organisation and functioning of the Federal Court of Justice;
 
 Oameroon
 
 35
 
 
 The territorial boundaries of the Federated States;
 Organisation of services pertaining to these matters.
 Art. 6. The powers of the Federal Authorities shall also embrace the
 following:
 Public liberties;
 The law of persons and of property;
 The law of obligations and contracts in civil and commercial matters;
 Judicial organization, including the rules of procedure and jurisdiction
 of all courts (with the exception of Customary Courts of West Cameroon,
 save as regards appeals from the decisions of such Courts);
 Criminal law;
 Transport of federal importance (roads, railways, rivers, maritime and
 air transport) and ports;
 Prison administration;
 Legislation relating to State lands;
 Labour legislation;
 Public health;
 Secondary and technical education;
 Administrative organization;
 Weights and measures.
 So far as concerns the matters enumerated in this article, the authorities
 of the Federated States may continue to enact laws and to direct the
 corresponding administrative services until such time as the Federal
 National Assembly or the President of the Federal Republic, as the
 case may be, shall decide to exercise the powers vested in them re-
 spectively.
 The powers of the executive and legislative authorities, as the case may
 be, of the Federated States in respect of any such matters shall cease
 when the Federal Authorities have assumed responsibility therefor.
 Art. 7. Where under the provisions of the preceding article, the au-
 thorities of the Federated States are temporarily authorized to exercise
 powers in respect of matters within the jurisdiction of the Federal Au-
 thorities, they may enact laws on such matters only after consultation
 with the federal co-ordination commission.
 The said commission shall be presided over by a Federal Minister,
 and shall be composed of persons appointed by the President of the
 Federal Republic on the basis of competence.
 TITLE III
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC
 Art. 8. The President of the Federal Republic of Cameroon, Head of the
 Federal State and Head of the Federal Government, shall uphold the
 
 36
 
 Oameroon
 
 
 Federal Constitution and shall ensure the unity of the Federation and the
 conduct of the affairs of the Federal Republic.
 He shall be assisted in his duties by a Vice-President of the Federal
 Republic.
 Art. 9. The President of the Federal Republic and the Vice-President,
 who must not be natives of the same Federated State, shall be elected,
 on a single list, by universal suffrage and direct and secret ballot.
 Candidates for the offices of President of the Federal Republic and
 Vice-President must be in possession of their civil and political rights
 and must have attained the age governing the nomination of candidates,
 the supervision of elections and the proclamation of the results shall be
 prescribed by a Federal Law.
 The offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic shall be
 incompatible with any other office.
 Art. 10. The President of the Federal Republic shall be elected for a
 term of five years. He shall be eligible for re-election.
 Election shall be effected by a majority of the votes cast. Elections
 shall take place not less than twenty days and not more than fifty days
 before the expiry of the term of the President in office.
 In the event of the Presidency falling vacant for any reason whatsoever,
 the powers of the President of the Federal Republic shall automatically
 devolve upon the Vice-President until such time as a new President is
 elected.
 The ballot for the election of the new President shall take place not
 less than twenty days and not more than fifty days after the date on which
 the Presidency falls vacant.
 The President shall take the oath in the form prescribed by Federal
 law.
 Art. 11. The President of the Federal Republic shall appoint the Minis-
 ters and Deputy Ministers, whom he shall select from among the nationals
 of each of the Federal States. They shall be responsible to him. Their
 offices shall be terminated by him.
 The offices of Minister and Deputy Minister shall be incompatible with
 the exercise of any parliamentary mandate in either of the Federal States,
 with any post as national representative of a trade or professional associ-
 ation and with any public employment or gainful activity.
 Art. 12. The President of the Federal Republic shall represent the
 Federal State in all acts of public life. He shall be Head of the Armed
 Forces.
 Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign Powers shall be
 accredited by him.
 Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary of foreign Powers shall be
 accredited to him.
 The President of the Republic shall negotiate agreemen
 
 Cameroon
 
 37
 
 
 Treaties relating to matters within the sphere of Federal Law as defined
 in Article 24 shall be submitted, before ratification, for approval in legis-
 lative form by the Federal Assembly.
 He shall exercise the right of pardon on the advice of the Federal Council
 of Magistracy.
 He shall confer the decorations of the Federal Republic.
 He shall promulgate federal laws as provided in Article 31.
 He shall be responsible for the execution of federal laws and of such
 laws as may be adopted in the Federated States in pursuance of Article 6,
 last paragraph.
 He shall exercise the power to make regulations.
 He shall make appointments to federal posts, both civil and military.
 He shall uphold the internal and external security of the Federal
 Republic.
 He shall establish, organize and direct all administrative services
 necessary for the discharge of his duties or, if he deems it preferable,
 shall place under his own authority, after consulting the Heads of Govern-
 ment of the Federated States, the services of those States exercising the
 powers vested in the Federal Authorities under the provisions of Articles
 5 and 6.
 He may by decree delegate some of his powers to the Vice-President
 of the Federal Republic.
 Art. 13. The President of the Federal Republic must in all circumstances
 be consulted by the Governments of the Federated States when those
 Governments take measures which may affect the life of the Federation.
 He shall then request the Commission provided for in Article 7, to give an
 advisory opinion on the matter.
 Art. 14. The President of the Federal Republic shall refer to the Federal
 Court of Justice, constituted as provided in Article 34, any federal law
 which he considers to be contrary to the present Constitution or any law
 of either of the Federated States which he regards as having been adopted
 in violation of the provisions of the Constitution or of a federal law.
 Art. 15. The President of the Federal Republic may, when circumstan-
 ces so require, proclaim by decree a state of emergency under which he
 shall be vested with special powers, subject to the conditions prescribed
 by federal law.
 In the event of serious peril threatening the integrity of the national
 Territory, or of the life, independence, or institutions of the Nation, the
 President of the Federal Republic may, after consulting the Prime Minis-
 ters of the Federated States, proclaim by decree a state of special emergen-
 cy and take all measures as he may deem necessary.
 He shall inform the nation accordingly by means of a message.
 The Federal National Assembly shall automatically remain convened
 throughout the period of special emergency.
 
 38
 
 Cameroon
 
 
 Cameroon
 
 TITLE IV
 THE FEDERAL LEGISLATURE
 Art. 16. The Federal National Assembly, the term of which shall be
 five years, shall be composed of deputies elected by universal suffrage
 and direct and secret ballot in each of the Federated States in the ratio of
 one deputy to 80,000 inhabitants.
 Art. 17. Federal laws shall be adopted by simple majority of deputies.
 Art. 18. Before a law is promulgated, the President of the Federal
 Republic may request a second reading thereof, either of his own motion
 or at the request of either of the Prime Ministers of the Federated States.
 On second reading, the law shall be adopted only if the majority specified
 in the preceding article comprises a majority of the votes of the deputies
 of each of the Federated States.
 Art. 19. The Federal National Assembly shall hold two sessions an-
 nually; the duration of a session shall not exceed thirty days.
 The opening date for each session shall be fixed by the officers of the
 Assembly after consultation with the President of the Federal Republic.
 During one of the sessions the Federal Budget shall be voted by the
 Assembly. Where the Budget is not adopted by the end of the current
 financial year, the President of the Federal Republic shall be entitled
 to appropriate each month one twelfth of the amount of the previous
 Budget until the new Budget is adopted.
 The Federal National Assembly shall meet in special session of a
 duration not exceeding fifteen days in order to consider a specific agenda,
 at the request of the President of the Federal Republic or of two thirds
 of its members.
 Art. 20. The Federal National Assembly shall establish its own rules of
 procedure. It shall elect its President and other officers annually at the
 opening of its first session. Meetings of the Federal National Assembly
 shall be public. By way of exception, the Federal National Assembly may
 hold closed meetings at the request of the Federal Government or of a
 majority of its members.
 Art. 21. The electoral system of the Federation shall be determined
 by a federal law.
 Art. 22. The immunities, emoluments and privileges of deputies, the
 grounds of ineligibility for the office of deputy and the offices with which
 that of deputy shall be incompatible shall be laid down by Federal Law.
 
 39
 
 
 Cameroon
 
 TITLE V
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE EXECUTIVE AND THE
 FEDERAL LEGISLATURE
 Art. 23. The power to initiate legislation shall belong equally to the
 President of the Federal Republic and the Deputies of the Federal As-
 sembly.
 Art. 24. The following matters shall be within the sphere of Federal
 Law, within the framework of the powers specified in Articles 5 and 6.
 (1) The fundamental guarantees and obligations of the citizen:
 Protection of the freedom of the individual;
 Public liberties;
 Labour and trade-union legislation;
 The duties and obligations of the citizen in respect of national defence.
 (2) The law of persons and property;
 Nationality and personal status;
 The law of personal and real property;
 The law of civil and commercial obligations.
 (3) Political, administrative and judicial organization with respect to:
 The electoral system of the Federal Assembly;
 The general rules relating to the organization of national defence;
 The definition of crimes and offences and the establishment of penalties
 of any kind, criminal procedure, means of enforcement, amnesty, and
 the creation of new orders of jurisdiction.
 (4) The following questions of finance and property:
 The currency issue system;
 The Federal Budget;
 The institution, assessment and rates of federal taxes and dues of any
 kind;
 Legislation relating to State lands.
 (5) The aims of economic and social action within the framework of the
 laws, relating to economic and social policy.
 (6) The educational system.
 Art. 25. Legislative texts laid before the Assembly shall be considered
 by the competent committees before being discussed in plenary.
 Art. 26. The text considered in plenary shall be the text introduced
 by the President of the Federal Republic, in the case of a government bill,
 and the text drafted by the appropriate committee, in the case of a
 parliamentary bill. Texts may be amended when they are debated.
 Art. 27. The President of the Federal Republic may, at his request,
 address the Assembly or send messages to it. Such communications may
 not give rise to any debate in his presence.
 
 40
 
 
 Art. 28. The Ministers and Deputy Ministers of the Federation shall
 have access to the Assembly and may participate in its debates.
 Art. 29. The agenda of the Federal National Assembly shall be drawn
 up by the conference of chairmen, consisting of the chairmen of the
 parliamentary parties, the chairmen of committees and the officers of the
 Assembly. A Federal Minister or Deputy Minister shall take part in the
 work of the conference.
 Texts may not be placed on the agenda of the Assembly unless they
 fall within its competence under the terms of Articles 5, 6 and 24. Parlia-
 mentary bills or amendments shall be inadmissible if their adoption would
 lead either to a curtailment of public resources or to an increase in public
 expenditure without corresponding reduction in other expenditure or an
 equivalent increase in revenue.
 Where any doubt or dispute arises as to the admissibility of a text,
 the President of the Assembly or the President of the Federal Republic
 shall refer the matter to the Federal Court of Justice for its ruling.
 The discussion of government bills and of p~arliamentary bills which the
 Government has accepted shall have priority on the agenda, in the order
 fixed by the Government.
 The Government's request to treat any matter as one of first priority
 shall automatically be granted.
 Art. 30. The Government shall be obliged to give any explanations and
 any information on its actions to the Federal National Assembly, which
 may put questions to it orally or in writing and which may investigate
 government activity by setting up commissions of investigation.
 A Federal law shall lay down the procedures through which these rights
 of inquiry and supervision shall be exercised.
 Art. 31. The President of the Federal Republic shall promulgate the
 laws enacted by the Federal National Assembly within a fortnight of the
 date of their transmission, if no request for a second reading is made to
 him. At the end of this period, the President of the Federal Assembly
 may act in his place, after establishing his failure to do so.
 Laws shall be published in the two official languages of the Federal
 Republic.
 TITLE VI
 THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 32. Justice shall be administered in the territory of the Federal
 State in the name of the Cameroonian People by the competent courts of
 each State.
 The President of the Federal Republic shall be the guardian of the
 independence of the judicial authority and shall appoint the members
 of the judiciary of the Federated States.
 
 Cameroon
 
 41
 
 
 He shall be assisted in this task by the Federal Council of Magistracy,
 which shall give him its opinion on all proposed appointments of judges
 and shall act as the Disciplinary Council for the latter. Its organization
 and operation shall be governed by a federal law.
 Art. 33. The Federal Court of Justice shall have the following duties:
 (1) To settle any conflicts of jurisdiction which may arise between the
 highest courts of each of the Federated States;
 (2) To give final judgment on appeals under federal law against de-
 cisions given by the higher courts of the Federated States in any cases
 involving the application of federal law;
 (3) To give judgment in appeals for damages or on grounds of excess
 of authority against administrative acts by the federal authorities;
 (4) To give judgment in disputes between the Federated States or
 between either of them and the Federal Republic.
 The composition and procedure of the Federal Court of Justice and the
 rules under which cases may be brought before it shall be prescribed by a
 federal statute.
 Art. 34. When the Federal Court of Justice is called upon to give its
 decisions in the cases provided for in Articles 14 and 29, its membership
 shall be supplemented by an equal number of persons appointed for a
 period of one year by the President of the Federal Republic on the basis
 of their competence and experience.
 Art. 35. Judicial orders and decisions of any court in either of the
 Federated States shall be enforceable throughout the Federal Territory.
 TITLE VII
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 36. A Federal High Court of Justice is hereby established; its
 composition and the rules under which cases may be brought before it
 shall be prescribed by federal law.
 The Federal High Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction in respect of
 acts carried out in the exercise of their functions by the President of the
 Federal Republic, in the case of high treason, and by the Federal Vice-
 President, the Ministers of the Federal State, and the Prime Ministers and
 Secretaries of State of the Federated States, in the case of conspiracy
 against the security of the State.
 
 Cameroon
 
 42
 
 
 Cameroon
 
 TITLE VIII
 THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
 OF THE FEDERATION
 Art. 37. An Economic and Social Council of the Federation is hereby
 established; its composition, powers and organisation shall be prescribed
 by a federal law.
 TITLE IX
 THE FEDERATED STATES
 Art. 38. Matters other than those specified in Articles 5 and 6 and other
 than those which under the present Constitution are to be the subject
 of a federal law shall lie exclusively within the competence of the Federated
 States.
 Within those limits the said States may set up for themselves such
 institutions as they choose.
 The House of Chiefs of the Southern Cameroons shall be maintained.
 Art. 39. The President of the Federal Republic shall appoint the Prime
 Minister of each Federated State, who must be confirmed in office by
 simple majority vote of the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.
 The President shall appoint the Secretaries of State members of the
 Government on the proposal of the Prime Minister confirmed in office.
 He may relieve them of office under the same conditions.
 Art. 40. Legislative power shall be exercised in each Federated State by
 a Legislative Assembly to be elected for a term of five years by universal
 suffrage and direct and secret ballot, under conditions such as to ensure
 the representation of each administrative unit in proportion to the size
 of its population.
 Nevertheless, in West Cameroon certain powers may be exercised in
 matters of legislation by the House of Chiefs.
 The nature of those powers and the terms on which they are to be
 exercised shall be laid down by a law of the Federated State concerned
 subject to the provisions of this Constitution.
 The number of representatives in the Legislative Assembly of East
 Cameroon shall be one hundred; in the Legislative Assembly of West
 Cameroon, thirty-seven.
 The electoral system, the qualification for election, immunities and
 emoluments of members of the Legislative Assemblies and the offices
 with which that of member of a Legislative Assembly shall be incompatible
 shall be laid down by a federal law.
 
 43
 
 
 Art. 41. The Legislative Assemblies shall establish their own rules of
 procedure and shall elect their officers annually.
 They shall hold two sessions a year, neither of which shall be of a
 duration exceeding thirty days. The dates of the sessions shall be fixed
 by the Assembly officers after consultation with the Prime Minister of the
 Federal State, in such a way that the budget session shall not begin until
 after the adoption of the Federal Budget.
 They shall meet in special session of a duration not exceeding fifteen days
 in order to consider a specific agenda, at the request of the Prime Minister,
 of the President of the Federal Republic or of two-thirds of their members.
 Art. 42. Meetings of the Legislative Assemblies shall be public. By way
 of exception, the Assemblies may hold closed meetings on the request of
 the Government or of a majority of their members.
 Art. 43. The power to initiate legislation shall belong to the Government
 of each Federated State and the Representatives in the Legislative
 Assemblies.
 Laws shall be adopted by simple majority.
 Art. 44. If a vote of no confidence is adopted by simple majority or a
 motion of censure by absolute majority, the Prime Minister must tender
 his resignation to the President of the Federal Republic or shall be declared
 to have resigned. The President may then dissolve the Legislative Assem-
 bly.
 In the event of persistent disagreement between the Government and
 the Legislative Assembly, the President of the Federal Republic may
 dissolve the Assembly, either of his own motion or on the proposal of the
 Prime Minister.
 New elections shall be held within the following two months.
 Until a new Prime Minister is confirmed in office, the outgoing Govern-
 ment shall deal with current business.
 Art. 45. The President of the Legislative Assembly of each Federated
 State shall transmit laws enacted by the Assembly within twenty-one
 days to the President of the Federal Republic, who shall promulgate them
 within a fortnight of the date of their transmittal.
 Within the latter period the President of the Federal Republic may
 request the Legislative Assembly concerned to give such laws a second
 reading or may apply Article 14.
 At the end of the said period, the President of the Legislative Assembly
 concerned may act in his place, after establishing his failure to do so.
 Art. 46. Previous legislation of the Federated States shall remain in
 force in so far as it does not conflict with the provisions of this Consti-
 tution.
 
 44
 
 Cameroon
 
 
 Cameroon
 
 TITLE X
 REVISION OF THE CONSTITUTION
 Art. 47. Any proposal for the revision of the present Constitution which
 impairs the unity and integrity of the Federation shall be inadmissible.
 The power to initiate the revision of the Constitution shall belong equally
 to the President of the Federal Republic, after consultation with the
 Prime Ministers of the Federated States, and the Deputies of the Federal
 Assembly.
 Any proposal for revision submitted by the Deputies must be signed
 by at least one third of the Members of the Federal Assembly.
 Proposals for revision shall be adopted by simple majority vote of the
 Members of the Federal Assembly, provided that such majority includes
 a majority of the representatives in the Federal Assembly of each of the
 Federated States.
 The President of the Federal Republic may request, under the same
 conditions as for a federal law that a second reading be given to a law
 revising the Constitution.
 TITLE XI
 TRANSITIONAL AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 48. The powers specified in Article 5 shall be exercised ipso jure
 by the federal authorities from the moment of their establishment.
 Art. 49. Each of the Governments of the Federated States shall transmit
 to the Federal Government all the documents and records necessary for
 the discharge of its functions. It shall place at the disposal of the Federal
 Government the services which are to exercise the federal powers under
 the latter's authority.
 Art. 50. By way of exception, for a period of six months from 1st
 October 1961, the legislative measures necessary for the establishment
 of the constitutional institutions and until they are established, for the
 functioning of the public authorities and for the life of the Federal State,
 shall be taken by the President of the Federal Republic in the form of
 ordinances having the force of law.
 Art. 51. The President of the Republic of Cameroun shall be President
 of the Federal Republic until the end of his present term of office.
 Art. 52. During the term of office of the first President of the Federal
 Republic, the Prime Minister of West Cameroon shall be Vice-President
 of the Federal Republic. The provisions of Article 9 regarding the incom-
 
 45
 
 
 patibility of the office of Vice-President of the Federal Republic with
 other offices shall not apply during this period.
 Art. 53. From 1st October 1961, the National Assembly of the Republic
 of Cameroun and the House of Assembly of Southern Cameroons shall
 become the first Legislative Assemblies of East Cameroon and West
 Cameroon respectively.
 Art. 54. Until 1st April 1964, the Federal National Assembly shall
 consist of deputies appointed from among their members by the Legis-
 lative Assemblies of the Federated States in proportion to the number
 of inhabitants of each State, in the ratio of one deputy to 80,000 inhabitants.
 Art. 55. Until the election of the Federal Assembly in accordance with
 the terms of Article 16, the federal offices of Minister and Deputy Minister
 shall be compatible, the provisions of Article 11 notwithstanding, with the
 exercise of parliamentary mandate in a Federated State.
 Art. 56. On 1st October 1961, the Government of the Republic of
 Cameroun and the Government of Southern Cameroons under British
 administration shall become the Governments of the two Federated
 States respectively.
 Art. 57. Until the establishment of the Economic and Social Council
 of the Federation, the Economic and Social Council of the Republic of
 Cameroun shall be maintained.
 Art. 58. Until the final federal budget is adopted, a provisional federal
 budget shall be drawn up and shall be financed by contributions from
 each of the Federated States, to be determined after approval by the
 Governments of those States.
 Art. 59. The present provisions, by which the Constitution of the
 Republic adopted on 21st February 1960 by the Camerounian people
 is revised, shall enter into force on 1st October 1961. The revised Consti-
 tution shall be published in French and in English, the French text
 being authentic.
 Art. 60. For the purposes of this Constitution the population of the
 Federated States shall be taken on the basis of United Nations statistics,
 to be as follows:
 East Cameroon: 3,200,000 inhabitants;
 West Cameroon: 800,000 inhabitants.
 If significant changes in these figures are revealed by future censuses,
 they may be amended by a federal law.
 Yaoundd, lst of September, 1961
 
 46
 
 Cameroon
 
 
</pre>
