<pre>
 The Constitution
 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC
 OF GHANA
 ARRANGEMENT OF ARTICLES
 CHAPTER ONE
 THE CONSTITUTION
 Article
 1. The Supremacy of the Constitution
 2. Enforcement of the Constitution
 3. Defence of Constitution
 CHAPTER TWO
 THE TERRITORIES OF GHANA
 4. Territories of Ghana
 CHAPTER THREE
 CITIZENSHIP
 5. Citizens of Ghana
 6. Persons born in or outside Ghana
 7. Foundlings
 8. Persons entitled to be registered as citizens
 9. Dual citizenship
 10. Citizenship laws by Parliament
 11. Interpretation
 CHAPTER FOUR
 LIBERTY OF THE INDIVIDUAL
 Fundamental Human Rights
 12. Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual
 13. Welfare of the family
 14. Protection of right to life
 15. Protection of right to personal liberty
 16. Protection from slavery and forced labour
 17. Protection from inhuman treatment
 18. Protection from deprivation of property
 19. Protection for privacy of home and other property
 20. Provisions to secure protection of law
 21. Protection of freedom of conscience
 22. Protection of freedom of expression
 23. Protection of freedom of assembly and association
 24. Protection of freedom of movement
 25. Protection from discrimination on grounds of race, etc.
 Emergency Powers
 26. Provisions for times of war and public emergency
 27. Protection of persons detained under emergency laws
 28. Enforcement of protective provisions
 CHAPTER FIVE
 REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
 29. The right to vote
 30. The Electoral Commission
 31. Supervision of elections and referenda
 32. Constituencies
 33. Voting at elections and referenda
 34. Unopposed candidates
 35. Restrictions on the formation of organisations
 
 CHAPTER SIX
 
 THE EXECUTIVE
 The President
 Article
 36. The President of Ghana
 37. The executive authority of Ghana
 38. Exercise of President's functions
 39. Public and Presidential Seals
 40. Qualifications of President
 41. Election of President
 42. Challenging election of President
 43. The Presidential Election Rules
 44. Term of office
 45. Presidential messages and addresses
 46. Conditions of office
 47. Removal of President
 48. Appointments by the President
 49. Appointments on advice
 50. Prerogative of mercy
 51. Professional organisations
 52. Determination of certain emoluments
 Council of State
 53. The Council of State
 The National Security Council
 54. Composition of the National Security Council
 55. Functions of the National Security Council
 56. Establishment of Security Services
 
 iii
 
 International Relations
 
 Article
 57. International relations
 58. Diplomatic representation
 59. Execution of treaties
 The Cabinet
 60. The Prime Minister
 61. The Cabinet
 62. Oaths
 63. Meetings of the Cabinet
 64. Tenure of office of Ministers
 65. Ministerial Secretaries
 66. Votes of Confidence
 67. Declaration of Assets
 The Attorney-General
 68. The Attorney-General
 CHAPTER SEVEN
 THE LEGISLATURE
 Composition of Parliament
 69. The Parliament of Ghana
 70. Composition of the National Assembly
 71. Qualifications and.,disqualifications
 72. The Speaker
 73. The Leader of the Opposition
 74. The Deputy Speaker ..
 75. Tenure. of office of members
 76. Determination of questions as to, membership
 77. Clerk of the National Assembly and his staff
 
 iv
 
 
 Procedure in the National Assembly
 
 Article
 78. Oath to be taken by members
 79. Presiding in the National Assembly
 80. Quorum in the National Assembly
 81. Committees of the National Assembly
 82. Voting in the National Assembly
 83. Unqualified persons sitting or voting
 84. Mode of exercising legislative power
 85. Restrictions with regard to settlement of financial
 matters
 86. Standing Orders of the National Assembly
 Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution, etc.
 87. Sessions of Parliament
 88. Prorogation and dissolution
 89. Declaration of assets
 90. Allowances for members of the National Assembly
 Privileges and Immunities
 91. Freedom of speech and proceedings
 92. Immunity from proceedings for acts in the Assembly
 93. Immunity from service of process and arrest
 94. Immunity from witness summons
 95. Immunity from service as juryman
 96. Immunity from publication of proceedings
 97. Privileges of witnesses
 Contempt of Parliament
 98. General contempt
 99. Criminal proceedings
 
 v
 
 
 CHAPTER EIGHT
 
 THE OMBUDSMAN
 Article
 100. Establishment of Ombudsman
 101. Other functions of the Ombudsman
 CHAPTER NINE
 THE JUDICIARY
 The Superior Court of Judicature
 102. The Judicial power of Ghana
 The Supreme Court
 103. Composition of the Supreme Court
 104. General jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 105. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 106. Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 107. Supervisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 108. Powers of a single Justice of the Supreme Court
 The Court of Appeal
 109. Composition of the Court of Appeal
 110. Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
 111. Powers of a single Justice of the Court of Appeal
 The High Court of Justice
 112. Composition of the High Court of Justice
 113. Jurisdiction of the High Court of Justice
 114. Supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court of Justice
 Miscellaneous
 115. Appointment of Justices of the Superior Court of
 Judicature
 116. Tenure of office
 
 v
 
 
 Article
 117. Salaries, etc.
 118. Judicial Oath
 119. Judicial Council
 120. Appointment of other judicial officers
 121. Rules of Court
 122. Officers and servants and expenses of Courts
 123. Fees and fines
 124. Discovery of official documents
 125. Succession of Courts
 CHAPTER TEN
 THE LAWS OF GHANA
 126. The Laws of Ghana
 CHAPTER ELEVEN
 FINANCE
 127. Taxation
 128. The Consolidated Fund
 129. Withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other
 public funds
 130. Authorisation of expenditure
 131. Authorisation of expenditure in advance of appro-
 priation
 132. Contingency Fund, etc.
 133. Loans
 134. Public Debt
 The Auditor-General
 135. The Auditor-General
 The Audit Service
 136. The Audit Service
 137. The Audit Service Board
 
 vii
 
 
 CHAPTER TWELVE
 
 THE PUBLIC SERVICES COMMISSION
 Article
 138. Protection for the Public Services
 139. The Public Services Commission
 140. Appointments, etc., of public officers
 141. Other functions of the Public Services Commission
 CHAPTER THRTEEN.
 THE POLICE SERVICE
 142. The Police Service
 143. The Police Council
 144. Regional Police Committees
 145. Administration of the Police Service
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 THE PRISONS SERVICE
 146. The Prisons Service
 147.. The Prisons Service Board
 148. Administration of the Prisons Service
 CHAPTER FWEEN
 THE ARMED FORCES OF GHANA
 149. Raising of armed forces
 150. The Armed Forces Council
 151. Appointments; and other functions of the Armed
 Forces Council
 152. Functions of the Armed Forces Council
 
 viii
 
 
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN
 
 CHIEFTAINCY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
 Article
 153. Institution of Chieftaincy
 154. National House of Chiefs
 155. Regional House of Chiefs
 156. Local Government Councils
 157. Local Councils
 158. District Councils
 159. Regional Councils
 160. Local government finance
 161. Local government functions, etc.
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
 LANDS
 Public Lands
 162. Public lands and other public property
 Lands Commission
 163. The Lands Commission
 Stool Lands
 164. Stool and Skin lands and other property
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
 COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY
 165. Appointment of Commission of Inquiry
 166. Powers of Commission of Inquiry
 167. Functions of Commission of Inquiry
 168. Rules of Evidence
 CHAPTER NINETEEN
 AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
 169. Amendments to the Constitution
 
 ix
 
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY
 
 MISCELLANEOUS
 Article
 170. Claims against Government
 171. Legal aid
 172. Interpretation
 173. Exercise of discretionary power
 174. Implied power
 175. Residual powers of Parliament
 176. Transitional provisions
 177. Reprinting of Constitution
 FIRST SCHEDULE            ART 176
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 SECOND SCHEDULE
 OATHS
 
 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA
 
 IN THE NAME OF ALMIGHTY GOD from Whom
 all authority is derived and to Whom all actions both of
 men and States must be referred
 WE THE CHIEFS AND PEOPLE OF GHANA
 HAVING experienced a regime of tyranny
 REMEMBERING with gratitude the heroic struggle
 against oppression
 HAVING solemnly resolved never again to allow ourselves
 to be subjected to a like regime
 DETERMINED to secure for all of us a Constitution which
 shall establish the SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE
 and the RULE OF LAW as the foundation of our society
 and which shall guarantee
 FREEDOM of thought, expression and religion
 JUSTICE-social, economic and political
 RESPECT for the dignity of the individual; and
 EQUALITY of opportunity
 DO HEREBY IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
 AND IN EXERCISE OF THE POWERS CONFERRED
 ON THIS CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BY PARA-
 GRAPHS 1 AND 2 OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEM-
 BLY (AMENDMENT) DECREE, 1969 (N.L.C.D. 380)
 ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
 CONSTITUTION THIS TWENTY-SECOND DAY OF
 AUGUST, 1969
 THIS CONSTITUTION SHALL COME INTO
 FORCE AS THE CONSTITUTION OF GHANA ON
 THE TWENTY-SECOND DAY OF AUGUST, 1969.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER ONE
 THE CONSTITUTION
 1. (1) The sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of summcY
 Ghana whose welfare is enshrined in this Constitution. 
 (2) This Constitution shall be the supreme law of the nation.
 Ghana and any other law found to be inconsistent with
 any provision of this Constitution shall, to the extent
 of the inconsistency, be void and of no effect.
 2. (1) Any person who alleges that an enactment or anything contained in or done under the authority of that or any other enactment is inconsistent with, or is in contravention of, any provision of this Constitution may bring an action in the Supreme Court for a declaration to that effect.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall, for the purposes of a
 declaration under the provisions of the preceding clause,
 make such orders and give such directions as it may consider
 appropriate for giving effect to or enabling effect to be
 given to the declaration so made.
 3. (1) Parliament shall have no power to pass a law 
 establishing a one-party State.                         
 (2) Any activity of a person, persons or group of
 persons which suppresses or seeks to suppress the lawful
 political activity of any other person or persons generally
 or any class of persons shall be an unlawful act.
 (3) Where any activity is found to be unlawful pursuant to the provisions of clause (2) of this article, the
 Supreme Court shall, for the first offence,
 (a) grant an injunction against the person, persons
 or group of persons, as the case may be, from
 carrying on any further the activity complained
 of; and
 (b) bind the person, persons or group of persons,
 as the case may be, over to be of good behaviour
 for a period of five years;
 and for a second or subsequent offence, any such person,
 persons or group of persons shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and in addition any person so convicted shall not be eligible for election to the National Assembly or for election to a local government council or be eligible for appointment to any public office for a period of ten years beginning from the date of the expiration of the term of imprisonment.
 
 
 CHAPTER Two
 THE TERRITORIES OF GHANA
 4. (1) The Sovereign State of Ghana is a unitary Republic
 consisting of those territories comprised in the Regions
 which, immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution, existed in Ghana including the territorial
 waters and the air space.
 (2) Whenever on a petition presented in that behalf
 the President and the Council of State are satisfied that
 there is a substantial demand for
 (a) the creation of an additional Region, or
 (b) the alteration of the boundaries of a Region,
 whether or not any such alteration involves
 the creation of a new Region, or
 (c) the merger of any two or more Regions,
 the President shall, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Council of State, appoint a Commission of Inquiry to
 inquire into any such demand and to make recommendations on all the factors involved in any such creation,
 alteration or merger.
 (3) Whenever a Commission of Inquiry appointed
 pursuant to the provisions of clause (2) of this article is
 satisfied that there is the need and a substantial demand for
 any such creation, alteration or merger as is referred to in
 that clause, it shall recommend to the President that a
 referendum shall be held specifying the issues to be deter-
 mined by the referendum and the places where any such
 referendum should be held.
 (4) The President shall refer the recommendations to
 the Electoral Commission; and any such referendum shall
 be conducted in such manner as the Electoral Commission
 may prescribe.
 
 3
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) Where at a referendum held pursuant to the
 provisions of the two immediately preceding clauses the
 total number of votes cast is less than seventy-five per centwn
 of the number of persons entitled to vote at that referendum,
 no results shall be declared by the Electoral Commission
 in respect of any issue for determination by the referendum,
 unless sixty per centum or more of the persons entitled to
 vote at that referendum voted in favour of or against any
 of the issues to be determined by the referendum:
 Provided that where any such referendum involves
 the merger of two or more Regions, no results shall be
 declared by the Electoral Commission unless sixty per
 centum or more of the persons entitled to vote at the
 referendum in each such Region voted in favour of or
 against the merger of the two or more Regions.
 (6) The President shall, acting in accordance with
 the results of the referendum held pursuant to the provi-
 sions of clauses (3) and (4) of this article, issue a constitu-
 tional instrument giving effect, or enabling effect to be
 given, to any such results.
 
 4
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER THREE
 CITIZENSHIP
 5. Every person who, on the coming into force of this CITIZENS OF
 Constitution, is a citizen by law of Ghana shall continue to GHANA.
 be such a citizen.
 6. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, every PERSONS
 person born in or outside Ghana after the coming into OUTSIE
 force of this Constitution shall become a citizen of Ghana GHANA.
 at the date of his birth if either of his parents is or was a
 citizen of Ghana.
 7. A child of not more than seven years of age found FOUN  3s.
 in Ghana whose parents are not known shall be presumed
 to be a citizen of Ghana by birth.
 8. (1) Any woman who, on the coming into force of this PERSONS
 Constitution, is or has been married to a person,     B  EDTO
 TERED AS
 (a) who is or becomes a citizen of Ghana by virtue  NS.
 of the provisions of article 5 of this Consti-
 tution, or -
 (b) who, having died before the coming into force
 of this Constitution would, but for his death,
 have become a citizen of Ghana by virtue of
 that article,
 may, upon making an application therefor in such manner
 as may be prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a
 citizen of Ghana.
 (2) Any woman who is married to a person who
 subsequently becomes a citizen of Ghana may, upon
 making an application therefor in such manner as may be
 prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a citizen of
 Ghana.
 (3) Any woman who, after the coming into force of
 this Constitution, marries a citizen of Ghana may, upon
 making an application therefor in such manner as may be
 prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a citizen of
 Ghana.
 
 5
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where the marriage of any woman as is referred
 to in the preceding provisions of this article is annulled,
 any such woman having registered as a citizen of Ghana by
 virtue of the said marriage shall cease to be a citizen of
 Ghana.
 DUAL        9. (1) Any person who, upon the attainment of the age
 SHIP.    of twenty-one years, is a citizen of Ghana and also a citizen
 of some country other than Ghana shall, subject to the
 provisions of clause (7) of this article, cease to be a citizen
 of Ghana upon the specified date unless
 (a) he has renounced his citizenship of that other
 country; and
 (b) he has, in the case of a citizen of Ghana
 born outside Ghana, made and registered
 such declaration of his intentions concerning
 residence as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (2) Any person who
 (a) has attained the age of twenty-one years on
 the coming into force of this Constitution, and
 (b) becomes a citizen of Ghana on that day by
 virtue of the provisions of article 5 of this
 Constitution, and
 (c) is on or after that day also a citizen of some
 country other than Ghana,
 shall, subject to the provisions of clause (7) of this article,
 cease to be a citizen of Ghana upon the specified date unless
 he has renounced his citizenship of that other country and
 taken the oath of allegiance.
 (3) A citizen of Ghana shall cease to be a citizen of
 Ghana if, having attained the age of twenty-one years,
 (a) he acquires the citizenship of some country
 other than Ghana by voluntary act, other than
 marriage; or
 (b) he otherwise acquires the citizenship of some
 country other than Ghana and has not, by the
 specified date, renounced his citizenship of
 that other country, taken the oath of allegiance
 
 6
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 and made and registered such declaration of
 his intentions concerning residence as may be
 prescribed by Parliament.
 (4) Where the law of a country, other than Ghana,
 requires a person who marries a citizen of that country to
 renounce his citizenship of his own country by virtue of that
 marriage, any citizen of Ghana who is deprived of his
 citizenship of Ghana by virtue of any such marriage shall,
 on the dissolution of that marriage if he thus loses his
 citizenship acquired by the said marriage, become a citizen
 of Ghana.
 (5) Any person who
 (a) becomes a citizen of Ghana by registration
 under the provisions of article 8 of this Con-
 stitution, and
 (b) is, immediately after the day upon which he
 becomes a citizen of Ghana, also a citizen of
 some other country,
 shall, subject to the provisions of clause (7) of this article,
 cease to be a citizen of Ghana upon the specified date unless
 he has renounced his citizenship of that other country,
 taken the oath of allegiance and made and registered such
 declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may
 be prescribed by Parliament.
 (6) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "specified date" means, in relation to a person,
 (a) to whom clause (1) of this article refers, the
 date on which he attains the age of twenty-one
 years or the date of the coming into force of
 this Constitution whichever is later; or
 (b) to whom paragraph (b) of clause (3) and
 clause (5) of this article refer, the date on
 which his citizenship will ordinarily operate; or
 in the case of a person of unsound mind, such later date as
 may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (7) Provision may be made by or under an Act of
 Parliament for extending beyond the specified date the
 period in which any person may make a renunciation of
 citizenship, take an oath or make or register a declaration
 
 7
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 for the purposes of this article; and if such provision is
 made that person shall not cease to be a citizen of Ghana
 upon the specified date but shall cease to be such a citizen
 upon the expiration of the extended period if he has not
 then made the renunciation, taken the oath or made or
 registered the declaration, as the case may be.
 CMZEN-     10. (1) Parliament may make provision for the acquisi-
 BY PAR-  tion of citizenship of Ghana by persons who are not eligible
 UAMENT.  or who are no longer eligible to become citizens of Ghana
 under the provisions of this Chapter.
 (2) Save as otherwise provided in article 8 of this
 Constitution, no person shall be registered to be a citizen
 of Ghana unless at the time of his application for registra-
 tion he is able to speak and understand a Ghanaian lan-
 guage.
 (3) The High Court of Justice may, on an application
 made in that behalf by the Attorney-General, deprive any
 person who is a citizen of Ghana, otherwise than by birth,
 of that citizenship on the ground that the activities of any
 such person are inimical to the security of the state or
 prejudicial to public morality or the public interest.
 (4) Parliament may make provision for the renun-
 ciation by any person of his citizenship of Ghana.
 INTERPRE-  11. Any reference in this Chapter to the national
 TATION.
 status of the father or mother of a person at the time of the
 birth of that person shall, in relation to a person born after
 the death of the father or mother, be construed as a reference
 to the national status of the father or mother at the time of
 the father's or mother's death; and accordingly, where that
 death occurred before the coming into force of this Consti-
 tution, the national status that the father or mother would
 have had if he or she had died on the coming into force of
 this Constitution shall be deemed to be his or her national
 status at the time of his or her death.
 
 8
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FouR
 LIBERTY OF THE INDIVIDUAL
 Fundamental Human Rights
 12. Every person in Ghana shall be entitled to the FUNDAMEN-
 fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is AND FREE-
 to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political DOMS OF THE
 opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for
 the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest,
 to each and all of the following, that is to say,
 (a) life, liberty, security of the person, the pro-
 tection of the law and unimpeded access to the
 Courts of law; and
 (b) freedom of conscience, of expression and of
 assembly and association; and
 (c) protection for the privacy of his home, corre-
 spondence and other property, and from depri-
 vation of property without compensation;
 and accordingly, the provisions of this Chapter shall have
 effect for the purposes of affording protection to those rights
 and freedoms, subject to the provisions of article 3 of this
 Constitution and to such limitations of that protection as
 are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed
 to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms
 by any individual shall not prejudice the rights and freedoms
 of others or the public interest.
 13. The family being the unit of society, Parliament WELFARE OF
 shall enact such laws as will ensure,                   THE FAMILY.
 (a) the right of women and children to such
 special care and assistance as are necessary for
 the maintenance of their health, safety, develop-
 ment and well-being;
 (b) that all children shall have a right to the
 enjoyment of the same measure of special care
 and assistance;
 
 9
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) that parents undertake their natural right and
 supreme sacred duty in the upbringing of
 children in co-operation with such institutions
 or organisations as Parliament may by law
 prescribe;
 and generally enact such laws as are necessary for the
 protection, advancement and welfare of the family.
 PROTECTION  14. (1) No person shall be deprived of his life inten-
 OF RIGHT
 TO LIFE.  tionally save in the execution of the sentence of a Court in
 respect of a criminal offence under the law of Ghana of
 which he has been convicted.
 (2) Without prejudice to any liability for a contraven-
 tion of any other law with respect to the use of force in
 such cases as are hereinafter mentioned, a person shall not
 be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contraven-
 tion of this article if he dies as the result of the use of force
 to such an extent as is reasonably justifiable in the circum-
 stances of the case, that is to say,
 (a) for the defence of any person from violence or
 for the defence of property; or
 (b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent
 the escape of a person lawfully detained; or
 (c) for the purposes of suppressing a riot, insur-
 rection or mutiny; or
 (d) in order to prevent the commission by that
 person of a criminal offence;
 or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
 PROTECTION  15. (1) No person shall be deprived of his personal
 OF RIGHTma                         itrrcAb          in      o
 TO PESNAL liberty save as may be authorised by law in any of the
 LIBERTY.  following cases, that is to say,
 (a) in execution of the sentence or order of a Court
 in respect of a criminal offence of which he
 has been convicted; or
 (b) in execution of the order of a Court punishing
 him for contempt of Court; or
 (c) in execution of the order of a Court made to
 secure the fulfilment of any obligations imposed
 on him by law; or
 
 10
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (d) for the purposes of bringing him before a Court
 in execution of the order of a Court; or
 (e) upon reasonable suspicion of having com-
 mitted, or being about to commit, a criminal
 offence under the law of Ghana; or
 (f) for the purposes of the education or welfare of
 a person who has not attained the age of
 majority; or
 (g) for the purposes of preventing the spread of an
 infectious or contagious disease; or
 (h) for the purposes of the care or treatment or the
 protection of the community, where a person
 is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of unsound
 mind, addicted to drugs or alcohol, or a
 vagrant; or
 (i) for the purposes of preventing the unlawful
 entry of that person into Ghana, or for the
 purposes of effecting the expulsion, extradition
 or other lawful removal of that person from
 Ghana or for the purposes of restricting that
 person while he is being lawfully conveyed
 through Ghana in the course of his extradition
 or removal from one country to nnother.
 (2) Any person who is arrested, restricted or
 detained shall be informed immediately, in a language
 that he understands, of the reasons for his arrest, restric-
 tion or detention and of his right to consult Counsel of his
 own choice.
 (3) Any person who is arrested, restricted or
 detained,
 (a) for the purposes of bringing him before a Court
 in execution of the order of a Court, or
 (b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having com-
 mitted, or being about to commit, a criminal
 offence under the law of Ghana,
 and who is not released, shall be brought before a Court
 within twenty-four hours.
 
 11
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where a person arrested, restricted or detained
 in any circumstance as is mentioned in paragraph
 (b) of the immediately preceding clause is not tried
 within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any
 further proceedings: that may be brought against him, he
 shall be released either unconditionally or upon reason-
 able conditions, *including in particular such conditions
 as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at
 a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to
 trial.
 (5) Any person who is unlawfully arrested, res-
 tricted or detained by any other person shall be entitled
 to compensation therefor from that other person.
 (6) Where a person who has served the whole or
 part of his sentence is acquitted on appeal,
 (a) by a Court, other than the Supreme Court,
 the Court may certify to the Supreme Court
 that the person so acquiitted be paid compen-
 sation; and the Supreme Court may, upon
 examination of all the facts and the certificate
 of the Court concerned, award such compen-
 sation as it may deem fit;
 (b) by the Supreme Court, it may order compen-
 sation to be paid to the person so acquitted.
 PROTECnON   16. (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude.
 ROM SLAV-
 ERY AND         (2) No person shall be required to perform forced
 RBD.      labour.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "forced labour" shall not-include
 (a) any labour required in consequence of the
 sentence or order of a Court; or
 (b) any labour required of a member of a dis-
 ciplined force in pursuance of his duties as
 such or, in the case of a person who has
 conscientious objections to service as a member
 of a naval, military or air force, any labour
 that that person is required by law to perform
 in place of such service; or
 
 12
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) any labour required during any period when
 Ghana is at war or in the event of any emer-
 gency or calamity that threatens the life and
 well-being of the community to the extent that
 the requiring of such labour is reasonably
 justifiable in the circumstances of any situation
 arising or existing during that period or as a
 result of that other emergency or calamity,
 for the purposes of dealing with that situation;
 or
 (d) any labour reasonably required as p..rt of
 reasonable and normal communal or other
 civic obligations.
 17. (1) No person shall be subjected to              PROTECnON
 FROM
 (a) torture or inhuman or degrading punishment; nHUMAN
 or                                         TREATMENT.
 (b) any other condition that detracts or is likely
 to detract from his dignity and worth as a
 human being.
 (2) A person who has not been convicted of a
 criminal offence if kept or confined in a prison, shall not
 be treated as a convicted person, and shall be kept away
 from convicted persons.
 18. (1) No property of any description shall be compul- PROTECTION
 sorily taken possession of, and no interest in or right D'"VATION
 over property of any description shall be compulsorily OF PROPERTY.
 acquired by the State, except where the following condi-
 tions are satisfied, that is to say,
 (a) the taking of possession or acquisition is
 necessary in the interests of defence, public
 safety, public order, public morality, public
 health, town and country planning or the
 development or utilisation of any property in
 such manner as to promote the public benefit;
 and
 (b) the necessity therefor is such as to afford
 reasonable justification for causing any hard-
 ship that may result to any person having an
 interest in, or right over, the property; and
 
 13
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) provision is made by a law applicable to that
 taking of possession or acquisition
 (i) for the prompt payment of adequate
 compensation; and
 (ii) securing to any person having an
 interest in, or right over, the property
 a right of access to the High Court of
 Justice, whether direct or on appeal
 from any other authority, for the
 determination of his interest or right,
 and the amount of any compensation
 to which he is entitled;
 and for the purposes of obtaining prompt
 payment of that compensation.
 (2) Nothing in this article shall be construed as
 affecting the operation of any general law so far as it
 provides for the taking of possession or acquisition of
 property
 (a) by way of vesting or administration of trust
 property, enemy property or the property of
 persons adjudged or otherwise declared bank-
 rupt or insolvent, persons of unsound mind,
 deceased persons, or bodies corporate or
 unincorporate in the course of being wound
 up; or
 (b) in the execution of judgments or orders of
 Courts; or
 (c) by reason of its being in a dangerous state
 or injurious to the health of human beings,
 animals or plants; or
 (d) in consequence of any law with respect to the
 limitation of actions; or
 
 14
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (e) for so long only as may be necessary for the
 purposes of any examination, investigation,
 trial or inquiry.
 (3) Nothing in this article shall be construed as
 affecting the making or operation of any law for the com-
 pulsory taking of possession in the public interest of any
 property or the compulsory acquisition in the public
 interest of any interest in, or right over, property, where
 that property, interest or right is held by a body corporate
 established by law for public purposes in which no moneys
 had been invested other than moneys provided by Parlia-
 ment.
 (4) Any such property of whatever description com-
 pulsorily taken possession of, and any interest in or right
 over property of any description compulsorily acquired in
 the public interest or for public purposes, shall be used
 only in the public interest or for public purposes.
 (5) Where any such property as is referred to in the
 immediately preceding clause is not used in the public
 interest or for public purposes the person who was the
 owner immediately before the compulsory possession or
 acquisition, as the case may be, shall be given the first
 option of acquiring the said property, in which event he
 shall be required to refund the whole or such part of the
 compensation paid to him as may be agreed upon between
 the parties thereto; and in the absence of any such agree-
 ment such amount as shall be determined by the High
 Court of Justice.
 19. (1) No person shall be subjected to the search of his PROTECTION
 person or his property nor shall his property or premises FOR PRIVACY
 OF HOME
 be entered into or intruded upon by others.              AND OTHER
 PROPERTY.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in con-
 travention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision
 
 15
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests
 of defence, public safety, public order, public
 morality, public health, town and country
 planning, the development and utilisation of
 mineral resources, or the development or
 utilisation of any other property in such a
 manner as to promote the public benefit; or
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purposes of
 promoting the rights or freedoms of other
 persons; or
 (c) that authorises an officer or agent of the
 Government of Ghana, a local government
 authority or a body corporate established by
 law for a public purpose to enter on the
 premises of any person in order to carry out
 work connected with anything thereon for the
 purposes of any tax, rate or due or in order
 to carry out work connected with any property
 that is lawfully on those premises that belongs
 to the Government, that authority or body
 corporate, as the case may be; or
 (d) for the purposes of enforcing the judgment or
 order of a Court in any civil proceedings;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 anything done under the authority thereof is shown not
 to be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this
 Constitution.
 PROVMONS   20. (1) Whenever any person is charged with a criminal
 offence, then, unless the charge is withdrawn, the case shall be afforded a fair hearing within a reasonable time by a Court.
 (2) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence
 (a) shall, in the case of an offence, other than treason, the punishment for which is death or imprisonment for life, be tried by a Judge and jury whose verdict shall
 (i) in the case of death, be unanimous; and
 (ii) in the case of an imprisonment for life be unanimous or by a majority; and
 (b) shall be presumed to be innocent until be is
 proved or has pleaded guilty; and
 (c) shall be informed immediately in a language
 that he understands, and in detail, of the
 nature of the offence charged; and
 (d) shall be given adequate time and facilities
 for the preparation of his defence; and
 (e) shall be permitted to defend himself before the
 Court in person or by Counsel of his own choice; and
 (f) shall be afforded facilities to examine in
 person or by his Counsel the witnesses called
 by the prosecution before the Court, and to
 obtain the attendance and carry out the
 examination of witnesses to testify on his
 behalf before the Court on the same conditions
 as those applying to witnesses called by the
 prosecution; and
 (g) shall be permitted to have, without payment by
 him, the assistance of an interpreter if he
 cannot understand the language used at the
 trial of the charge; and
 (h) shall, in the case of the offence of treason,
 be tried by the High Court of Justice duly
 constituted by three Justices thereof;
 and except with his own consent, the trial shall not take
 place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to
 render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence
 impracticable and the Court has ordered him to be removed
 and the trial to proceed in his absence.
 (3) Whenever a person is tried for any criminal
 offence the accused person or any person authorised by
 him in that behalf shall, if he so requires, and subject to the
 payment of such reasonable fee as may be prescribed by
 law, be given within a reasonable time after judgment a
 copy for the use of the accused person of any record of the
 proceedings made by or on behalf of the Court.
 
 17
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal
 offence on account of any act or omission that did not at
 the time it took place constitute such an offence.
 (5) No penalty shall be imposed for any criminal
 offence that is severer in degree or description than the
 maximum penalty that might have been imposed for that
 offence at the time when it was committed.
 (6) No person who shows that he has been tried by
 a competent Court for a criminal offence and either con-
 victed or acquitted shall again be tried for that offence or
 any other criminal offence of which he could have been
 convicted at the trial for the offence, save upon the order
 of a superior Court in the course of appeal or review
 proceedings relating to the conviction or acquittal.
 (7) Notwithstanding the provisions of the imme-
 diately preceding clause, an acquittal of any person on a
 trial for treason shall not be a bar to the institution of any
 proceedings for any other offence against that person.
 (8) The provisions of paragraph (a) of clause (2) of
 this article shall not apply in the case of trials by courts-
 martial or other military tribunals.
 (9) No person shall be tried for a criminal offence
 if he shows that he has been pardoned for that offence.
 (10) No person who is tried for a criminal offence
 shall be compelled to give evidence at the trial.
 (11) No person shall be convicted of a criminal
 offence unless that offence is defined and the penalty
 therefor is prescribed in a written law:
 Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent a
 Court of record from punishing any person for contempt
 of itself notwithstanding that the act or omission consti-
 tuting the contempt is not defined in a written law and the
 penalty therefor is not so prescribed.
 (12) An adjudicating authority for the determination
 of the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation
 shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be
 
 18
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 established by law and shall be independent and impartial;
 and where proceedings for such a determination are insti-
 tuted by any person before any such adjudicating authority
 the case shall be given a fair hearing within a reasonable
 time.
 (13) Save as may be otherwise ordered by the
 adjudicating authority in the interests of public morality,
 public safety, or public order the proceedings of any such
 adjudicating authority shall be in public.
 (14) Nothing contained in this article shall prevent
 an adjudicating authority from excluding from the pro-
 ceedings persons, other than the parties thereto and their
 Counsel, to such an extent as that authority
 (a) may consider necessary or expedient in circum-
 stances where publicity would prejudice the
 interests of justice or any interlocutory pro-
 ceedings; or
 (b) may be empowered by law so to do in the
 interests of defence, public safety, public
 order, public morality, the welfare of persons
 under the age of majority or the protection of
 the private lives of persons concerned in the
 proceedings.
 (15) Nothing contained in or done under the autho-
 rity of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, the provisions
 (a) of paragraph (b) of clause (2) of this article, to
 the extent that the law in question imposes
 upon any person charged with a criminal
 offence the burden of proving particular facts;
 or
 (b) of paragraph (f) of clause (2) of this article, to
 the extent that the law in question imposes
 conditions that shall be satisfied if witnesses
 called to testify on behalf of an accused person
 are to be paid their expenses out of public
 funds; or
 
 19
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) of clause (6) of this article, to the extent that
 the law in question authorises a Court to try a
 member of a disciplined force for a criminal
 offence notwithstanding any trial and con-
 viction or acquittal of that member under the
 disciplinary law of that force, so however, that
 any Court so trying such a member and
 convicting him shall, in sentencing him to any
 punishment, take into account any punish-
 ment awarded him under that disciplinary
 law; or
 (d) of paragraph (a) of article 12 of the Constitu-
 tion, to the extent that the law in question
 makes provision to guard against frivolous
 or vexatious proceedings in Court and any
 other abuse of legal process.
 (16) For the purposes of this article and subject to the
 provisions of clause (17) of this article, treason shall consist
 only
 (a) in levying war against Ghana or assisting any
 state or person or inciting or conspiring with
 any person to levy war against Ghana; or
 (b) in attempting by force of arms or other violent
 means to overthrow the organs of government
 established by or under this Constitution; or
 (c) in taking part or being concerned in, or inciting
 or conspiring with any person to make or take
 part or be concerned in, any such attempt.
 (17) Any act which aims at procuring by constitutional means an alteration of the law or of the policies of the Government shall not be considered as an act calculated to overthrow the organs of government.
 (18) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 article, but subject to the provisions of the next succeeding
 clause, Parliament may by or under an Act of Parliament
 establish military courts or tribunals for the trial of offences
 against military law committed by persons subject to
 military law.
 
 20
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (19) A person subject to military law, who, not being
 on active service, commits an offence cognisable by a civil
 Court, shall not be tried by a court-martial or military
 tribunal for any such offence unless the offence so committed
 is cognisable by the court-martial or other military tribunal
 under any law for the enforcement of military discipline.
 (20) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "criminal offence" means a criminal offence under the law
 of Ghana.
 21. (1) No person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of
 his freedom of conscience; and for the purposes of this
 article the said freedom shall include freedom of thought
 and of religion, freedom to change his religion or belief,
 and freedom, either alone or in community with others,
 and both in public and in private, to manifest and to propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance.
 (2) No person who, by reason of tender years,
 minority, sickness or any other sufficient cause, is unable
 to give his consent shall be deprived by any other person
 of his right to medical treatment or education or to any
 other social or economic benefit by reason only of any
 religious or philosophical doctrine or belief.
 (3) No person attending any place of education shall,
 except with his own consent, or, if he is a minor, the consent
 of his parents or guardian, be required to receive religious
 instruction or take part in or attend any religious ceremony
 or observance if that instruction, ceremony or observance
 relates to a religion or denominational practice other than
 his own.
 (4) No religious community or denomination shall be
 prevented from providing religious instruction for persons
 of that community or denomination in any educational
 institution.
 (5) No person shall be compelled to take any oath
 which is contrary to his religion or belief or to take any
 oath in a manner which is contrary to his religion or belief.
 
 21
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision which is reasonably required
 (a) in the interests of defence, public safety,
 public order, public morality or public health;
 or
 (b) for the purposes of protecting the rights and
 freedoms of other persons, including the right
 to observe and practise any religion without
 the unsolicited intervention of members of any
 other religion;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to
 be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this
 Constitution.
 PROTECTION  22. (1) No person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of
 OF FREm" his freedom of expression, that is to say, freedom to hold
 SIoN.     opinions and to receive and impart ideas and information
 without interference, and freedom from interference with
 his correspondence.
 (2) Any person responsible for any national medium
 for the dissemination of any kind of information to the
 public shall afford equal opportunities and facilities for
 the representation of opposing or differing views.
 (3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision
 (a) that is reasonably required
 (i) in the interests of defence, public safety,
 public order, public morality or public
 health; or
 (ii) for the purposes of protecting the
 reputations, rights and freedoms of
 other persons or the private lives of
 persons concerned in legal proceedings,
 preventing the disclosure of information
 received in confidence, maintaining the
 authority and independence of the
 22
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 Courts or regulating telephony, tele-
 graphy, posts, wireless broadcasting,
 television, public exhibitions or public
 entertainments; or
 (b) that imposes restrictions upon public officers;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to
 be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this Consti-
 tution.
 23. (1) No person shall be hindered in tne enjoyment
 of his freedom of assembly and association, that is to say,
 his right to assemble freely and associate with other persons
 and in particular to form or belong to trade unions or
 other associations for the protection of his interests.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests
 of defence, public safety, public order, public
 morality, public health or the running of
 essential services; or
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purposes
 of protecting the rights or freedoms of other
 persons; or
 (c) that imposes restrictions upon public officers;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to
 be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this Consti-
 tution.
 24. (1) No person shall be deprived of his freedom of
 movement; and for the purposes of this article the said
 freedom means the right to move freely throughout Ghana,
 the right to reside in any part of Ghana, the right to leave and
 to enter Ghana and immunity from expulsion from Ghana.
 (2) Any restriction on a person's freedom of move-
 ment that is involved in his lawful detention shall not be
 held to be inconsistent with, or in contravention of. this
 article.
 
 13.
 
 PROTECHON
 OF FREEDOM
 OF ASSEMBLY
 AND ASSO*
 CIATION.
 
 PROTECTION
 OM FREEDOM
 OF MOVE-
 MENT.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision
 (a) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of
 a Court, that are reasonably required in the
 interests of defence, public safety or public
 order on the movement or residence within
 Ghana of any person; or
 (b) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of
 a Court, on the movement or residence within
 Ghana of any person either in consequence
 of his having been found 'guilty of a criminal
 offence under the law of Ghana or for the
 purposes of ensuring that he appears before a
 Court at a later date for trial of such criminal
 offence or for proceedings preliminary to trial
 or for proceedings relating to his extradition
 or lawful removal from Ghana; or
 (c) for the imposition of restrictions that are
 reasonably required in the interests of defence,
 public safety, public order, public morality,
 public health or the running of essential
 services, on the movement or residence within
 Ghana of any person or persons generally, or
 any class of persons, and except so far as that
 provision or, as the case may be, the thing
 done under the authority thereof, is shown not
 to be reasonably justifiable in terms of the
 spirit of this Constitution; or
 (d) for the imposition  of restrictions on  the
 freedom of entry into Ghana or of movement
 in Ghana of any person wbo is not a citizen
 . of Ghana; or
 (e) for the removal of a person who is not a
 *  citizen of Ghana from Ghana in accordance
 with the law governing extradition for the
 time being iD force; or
 
 24
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (f) for any of the purposes specified in paragraph
 (i) of clause (1) of article 15 of this Constitution.
 (4) Whenever any person whose freedom of move-
 ment has been restricted by the order of a Court by virtue
 of such a provision as is referred to in paragraph (a) of
 clause (3) of this article so requests at any time during the
 period of that restriction not earlier than fourteen days
 after the order was made or three months after he last
 made such request, as the case may be, his case shall be
 reviewed by that Court.
 (5) On any review by a Court in pursuance of the
 provisions of clause (4) of this article of the case of any
 person whose freedom of movement has been restricted,
 the Court may, subject to the right to appeal therefrom,
 make such order for the continuation or termination of the
 restriction as it may consider necessary or expedient.
 25. (1) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4) and (6) of nonseno
 this article, no law shall make any provision that is dis-  A"oN
 criminatory either of itself or in its effect.          ON THE
 (2) Subject to the provisions of clauses (5), (6) and OF IMCE, etc.
 (7) of this article, no person shall be treated in a discri-
 minatory manner by any person acting by virtue of any
 law or m the performance of the functions of any public
 office or any public authority.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "discriminatory" means affording different treatment to
 different persons attributable only or mainly to their
 respective descriptions by race, place of origin, political
 opinions, colour, sex, occupation or creed whereby persons
 of one such description are subjected to disabilities or
 restrictions to which persons of another such description
 are not made subject or are accorded privileges or advan-
 tages which are not accorded to persons of another such
 description.
 (4) The provisions of clause (1) of this article shall
 not apply to any law, so far as that law makes provision .
 (a) for the appropriation of public revenues or
 other public funds; or
 
 25
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) with respect to adoption, marriage, divorce,
 burial, devolution of property on death or
 other matters of personal law; or
 (c) for the application in the case of members of a
 particular race or community of customary
 law with respect to any matter to the exclusion
 of any law with respect to that matter which is
 applicable in the case of other persons; or
 (d) whereby persons of such description as is
 mentioned in clause (3) of this article may be
 subjected to any disability or restriction or
 may be accorded any privilege or advantage
 which, having regard to its nature and to
 special circumstances pertaining to those per-
 sons or to persons of any other such description,
 is reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of
 this Constitution.
 (5) The provisions of clause (1) of this article shall
 not apply to any law, so far as that law makes provision,
 (a) with respect to persons who are not citizens of
 Ghana; or
 (b) for the imposition of restrictions on the acqui-
 sition of land by, or on the economic and
 political activities of, any person who is not a.
 citizen of Ghana.
 (6) The provisions of clause (2) of this article shall
 not apply to anything which is expressly or by necessary
 implication authorised to be done by any such provision
 of law as is referred to in clauses (4) and (5) of this article.
 (7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision whereby persons of any such
 description as is mentioned in clause (3) of this article may
 be subjected to any restriction on the rights and freedoms
 guaranteed by articles 19, 21, 22, 23 and 24 of this Constitu-
 tion, being such a restriction as is authorised by clause (2)
 of article 19, clause (6) of article 21, clause (3) of article 22,
 clause (2) of article 23, or clause (3) of article 24, as the
 case may be-
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (8) Nothing contained in clause (2) of this article
 shall affect any discretion relating to the institution, conduct
 or discontinuance of civil or criminal proceedings in any
 Court that is vested in any person by or under this Constitu-
 tion or any other law.
 Emergency Powers
 26. (1) The President may, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Cabinet, by Proclamation published in the Gazette, declare that a state of public emergency exists in Ghana or in any part of Ghana for the purposes of the provisions of this Chapter.
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 article, where a Proclamation is published pursuant to the
 provisions of the preceding clause, the President shall place
 immediately before the Council of State the facts and
 circumstances leading to the declaration of the state of
 public emergency and the Council of State shall, within
 seventy-two hours thereof, decide whether the Proclamation
 shall remain in force or shall be revoked; and the President
 shall act in accordance with the decisions of the Council
 of State made in that behalf.
 (3) A declaration of a state of public emergency
 under the provisions of this article, if not sooner revoked,
 shall cease to have effect at the expiration of a period of
 seven days beginning with the date of publication of the
 declaration unless, before the expiration of that period,
 it is approved by a resolution passed in that behalf by a
 majority of all the members of the National Assembly.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (5) of this
 article, a declaration of a state of public emergency approved
 by a resolution of the National Assembly under the provi-
 sions of clause (3) of this article shall continue in force
 until the expiration of a period of three months beginning
 with the date of its being so approved or until such earlier
 date as may be specified in the resolution:
 Provided that the National Assembly may, by resolu-
 tion, extend its approval of the declaration for periods of
 not more than one month at a time.
 
 2?
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) The National Assembly may, -by a resolution
 passed in that behalf by a majority of all the members of
 the Assembly, at any time revoke a declaration of a state
 of public emergency approved by the Assembly under the
 provisions of this article.
 (6) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared
 that the provisions of any enactment, other than an Act of
 Parliament, dealing with a state of public emergency
 declared pursuant to the provisions of clause (1) of this
 article shall apply only to that part of Ghana where any
 such emergency exists.
 (7) For the purposes of this article, a state of public
 emergency includes any action that has been taken or is
 immediately threatened by any persons or body of persons
 (a) which is calculated to - deprive the community
 of the essentials of life, or
 (b) which renders necessary the taking of measures
 which are requisite for -securing the public
 safety, the defence of Ghana and the main-
 tenance of public order and. of supplies and
 services essential to the life of the community.
 (8) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of an Act of Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent
 with. or in contravention of. articles 12 to 25 inclusive
 of this Constitution, to the extent that the Act in question
 authorises the taking during any period when a declara-
 tion of a state of public emergency under the, pyovisions
 of this article is in force, of measures that are reasonably
 justifiable for the purposes of dealing with the situation
 that exists during that period.
 PROTECiON   27. (1) Where a person is restricted or detained by
 DETAIE    virtue of such a law as is referred to in clause (8) of article
 UNDER     26 of this Constitution, the following provisions shall
 PMERGENCY   py.ta
 LMEAENCY apply, that is to say,
 (a) he shall, as soon as reasonably practicable and
 in any case not more. than twenty-four hours
 after the commencement of his restriction or
 
 28
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 detention, be furnished with a statement in writ-
 ing in English which shall, in the case of a person
 who does not understand English, be inter-
 preted to him in a language that he under-
 stands, specifying in detail the grounds upon
 which he is restricted or detained; and his
 next of kin shall also be informed within
 seventy-two hours of such commencement; and
 (b) not more than ten days after the commence-
 ment of his restriction, or detention, a notifi-
 cation shall be published in the Gazette
 stating that he has been restricted or detained
 and giving particulars of the provision of
 law under which his restriction or detention
 is authorised and the grounds of his restriction
 or detention; and
 (c) not more than fourteen days after the com-
 mencement of his restriction or detention and
 thereafter during his restriction or detention
 at intervals of not more than three months,
 his case shall be reviewed by a tribunal com-
 posed of not less than three Justices of the
 Supreme Court appointed by the Chief Justice
 and presided over by the Chief Justice or a
 Justice of the Supreme Court appointed by
 the Chief Justice; so however that the same
 tribunal shall not review more than once,
 the case of a person restricted or detained; and
 (d) he shall be afforded every possible facility
 to consult Counsel of his own choice who
 shall be permitted to make representations
 to the tribunal appointed for the review of
 the case of the restricted or detained person;
 and
 (e) at the hearing of his case he shall be permitted
 to appear in person or by Counsel of his own
 choice.
 (2) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of this
 article of the case of a restricted or detained person, the
 
 29
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 tribunal shall have power to order the release of the person
 and the payment to him of adequate compensation or
 uphold the grounds of his restriction or detention and
 the authority by which the restriction or detention was
 ordered shall act accordingly.
 (3) In every month in which there is a sitting of the
 National Assembly a Minister of State authorised by the
 Prime Minister shall make a report to the National Assem-
 bly of the number of persons restricted or detained by
 virtue of such a law as is referred to in clause (8) of article
 26 of this Constitution and the number of cases in which
 the authority that ordered the restriction or detention
 has acted in accordance with the decisions of the tribunal
 appointed in pursuance of this article.
 (4) Nothwithstanding the provisions of the imme-
 diately preceding clause, the Minister referred to therein
 shall publish every month in the Gazette
 (a) the number and the names and addresses
 of persons restricted or detained;
 (b) the number of cases reviewed by the tribunal,
 and
 (c) the number of cases in which the authority
 which ordered the restriction or detention
 has acted in accordance with the decisions
 of the tribunal appointed pursuant to the
 provisions of this article.
 (5) 'For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared
 that at the end of any emergency declared pursuant to the
 provisions of clause (1) of article 26 of this Constitution,
 any person in restriction or detention or in custody who
 has been detained, restricted or arrested as a result of the
 declaration of the emergency shall forthwith be released.
 ENFORCEMEMr 28. (1) Where any person alleges that any provision of
 OF PROTEc  articles 12 to 27 inclusive of this Constitution has been, or is
 TIV PROVI-.
 RONs. being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him, then,
 without prejudice to any other action with respect to the
 same matter that is lawfully available, that person may
 apply to the High Court of Justice for redress.
 
 30
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) Pursuant to the provisions of the immediately
 preceding clause, the High Court of Justice shall have power
 to issue such directions or orders or writs including writs
 or orders in the nature of habeas corpus, certiorari, man-
 damus, prohibition, and quo warranto as it may consider
 appropriate for the purposes of enforcing, or securing the
 enforcement of any of the provisions of the said articles
 12 to 27 inclusive to the protection of which the person
 concerned is entitled.
 (3) Any person aggrieved by any determination of
 the High Court of Justice under the provisions of this
 article may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal with
 the right of a further appeal to the Supreme Court.
 (4) The Rules of Court Committee may, by constitu-
 tional instrument, make Rules of Court with respect
 to the practice and procedure of the Superior Court of
 Judicature for the purposes of this article.
 (5) The rights, duties, declarations and guarantees
 relating to the fundamental human rights specifically men-
 tioned in this Chapter shall not be regarded as excluding
 others not specifically mentioned which are considered
 to be inherent in democracy and intended to secure the
 freedom and dignity of man.
 
 31
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FIVE
 REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
 THE aMn    29. Every citizen of Ghana being twenty-one years of
 'r   age and of sound mind shall have the right to vote; and
 accordingly shall be entitled to be registered as a voter for
 the purposes of public elections.
 THE ELEC- 30. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which
 coM  ON,. shall consist of a sole Commissioner who shall be known
 as the Electoral Commissioner, and who shall,
 (a) in the demarcation of the boundaries of
 constituencies for elections to the National
 Assembly, and
 (b) in the demarcation of the boundaries of the areas
 of authority of a Local or District Council,
 be assisted by two ad hoc Commissioners who shall be
 appointed for that purpose by the President acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Council of State.
 (2) The Electoral Commissioner shall be appointed
 by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Council of State.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified
 (a) for appointment as the Electoral Commissioner
 if he is not qualified to be elected as a member
 of the National Assembly; or
 (b) to hold office as the Electoral Commissioner
 while he still holds another public office or is
 a member of the National Assembly or if he
 has attained the age of sixty-five years.
 (4) The Electoral Commissioner when appointed
 shall enjoy the terms and conditions of service, other than
 such terms and conditions as relate to retiring awards, of
 a Justice of the Court of Appeal.
 (5) Whenever the Electoral Commissioner dies,
 resigns, is removed from office or is absent from Ghana, or
 is by reason of illness unable to perform the functions of
 
 32
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 his office the President shall, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Council of State, appoint a person qualified
 to be appointed Electoral Commissioner to perform those
 functions until the assumption of office of the Electoral
 Commissioner or until the Electoral Commissioner is able
 to perform those functions, or until the~appointment of a
 new Electoral Commissioner.
 (6) In the performance of any of his functions the
 Electoral Commissioner shall be subject only to this
 Constitution and shall not be subject to the direction or
 control of any other person or authority.
 (7) The appointment of officers and other employees
 of the staff of the Electoral Commission shall be made by
 the Electoral Commissioner acting in consultation with the
 Public Services Commission.
 (8) The administrative expenses of the Electoral
 Commission including all salaries, allowances and pensions
 payable to, or in respect of, persons serving with the Com-
 mission shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 31. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the suPERvISO
 Electoral Commissioner shall be responsible for the conduct TIONS AND
 and supervision of the registration of voters for, and of, all REFERENDA.
 public elections and referenda; and for that purpose shall
 have power, with the prior approval of the President, acting
 in accordance with the advice of the Council of State, to
 make Regulations by constitutional instrument for the
 registration of voters, the conduct of public elections and
 referenda and for the efficient supervision of elections and
 referenda and other matters connected therewith, including
 regulations for voting by proxy.
 (2) Where at a referendum, other than a referendum
 held pursuant to the provisions of clauses (3) and (4) of
 article 4 of this Constitution, the total number of votes cast
 is less than sixty per centum of the number of persons
 entitled to vote at that referendum, no results shall be
 declared by the Electoral Commission, unless fifty-one per
 centwn or more of the persons entitled to vote at that
 referendum voted in favour of or against the proposal for
 the referendum.
 
 33
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 coNS=""'M  32. (1) Ghana shall be divided into as many constituencies
 cMs.     as there are members of the National Assembly in such
 manner as the Electoral Commission may prescibe.
 (2) No constituency shall include part of a Region
 and part of another Region.
 (3) The boundaries of each constituency shall be
 such that the number of inhabitants thereof is as nearly
 equal to the population quota as is reasonably practicable:
 Provided that the number of inhabitants of a consti-
 tuency may be greater or less than the population quota
 in order to take account of means of communication,
 geographical features, density of population and the area
 and boundaries of the Regions and other administrative or
 traditional areas.
 (4) The Electoral Commission shall review the
 division of Ghana into constituencies
 (a) at intervals of not less than seven years, or
 (b) within twelve months of the publication of
 the enumeration figures after the holding of a
 census of the population of Ghana,
 whichever is earlier and may, subject to the provisions of
 article 70 of this Constitution, alter the constituencies
 in accordance with the provisions of this article to such an
 extent as it may consider desirable in the light of the review
 or by reason of the holding of the census of the population
 of Ghana.
 (5) Where the boundaries of any constituency estab-
 lished pursuant to the provisions of this article are altered,
 the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dis-
 solution of the National Assembly.
 (6) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "'population quota" means the number obtained by dividing
 the number of inhabitants of Ghana by the number of
 constituencies into which Ghana is divided pursuant to the
 provisions of this article.
 vanoAT     33. At any public election or referendum voting shall be
 ELEMTONS         balt
 AM PM    by secret ballot.
 RENDA.
 34
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 34. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, where UNOpOSE
 only one candidate is nominated at the close of nominations CANDIDATE
 on the nomination day preceding a public election there
 shall be no election and that candidate shall be declared
 elected.
 (2) Where for the purposes of a public election two
 or more candidates are nominated but at the close of
 nominations on the 'nomination day preceding the election
 only one candidate stands nominated, a further period of
 ten days shall be allowed for the nomination of other
 candidates, and it shall not be lawful for any person so
 nominated within the said period of ten days to withdraw
 his nomination.
 (3) Where at the close of nominations pursuant to
 the provisions of the immediately preceding clause only one
 candidate stands nominated there shall be no election and
 that candidate shall be declared elected.
 35. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of article 23 of Rnroc-E
 MIONS ON
 this Constitution, no organisation having as one of its aims THE FORMA
 or objects, the return of any member of the organisation at MON OF
 a public election,                                    ns.
 (a) shall be formed, the membership and leader-
 ship of which is restricted to members of any
 particular tribal group or religious faith; or
 (b) shall use any name, symbol or colour having
 any exclusive or particular significance or
 connotation to the members of any particular
 tribal group or religious faith; or
 (c) shall be formed for the sole purpose of
 securing whether directly or indirectly the
 welfare, advancement or interests of the
 members of any particular community or
 religious faith.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "organisation" includes any association of persons by
 whatever name called and a local or an affiliated branch of
 any such association of persons.
 
 35
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER SIX
 THE EXECUTIVE
 The President
 THE PRESI-  36. (1) There shall be a President of Ghana who shall be
 DENT OF
 GANA.    the Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of Ghana..
 (2) The President shall take precedence over all other
 persons in Ghana.
 (3) The President shall . receive such salary and
 allowances, and on. retirement such- pension, gratuity or
 other allowances, as may be prescribed by Parliament, in
 respect of all of which he shall be exempt from direct
 taxation.
 (4) The salary and allowances payable to the President
 and any pension or gratuity payable to him on retirement
 shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (5) The salary, allowances and privileges of the
 President shall not be varied to his disadvantage while he
 holds office.
 (6) Save as otherwise provided in article 47 of this
 Constitution and subject to the operation of . the preroga-
 tive writs, the President shall not be answerable to the
 National Assembly or be liable to any proceedings in any
 Court, for the performance of his functions or for any act
 done, or omitted to be done or purporting to be done in the
 performance of his functions under this Constitution or any
 other law.
 (7) Notwithstanding the provisions of the imme-
 diately preceding clause the President, while in office, shall
 not be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings whatso-
 ever in any Court.
 36
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (8) Without prejudice to the provisions of the
 immediately preceding clause, and notwithstanding any
 provision in any law relating to the limitation of actions, it
 shall be lawful to institute proceedings whether civil or
 criminal in any Court in Ghana against the President
 within three years of his ceasing to hold office as President.
 (9) Before assuming office the President shall take
 and subscribe before the Chief Justice and in the presence of
 the Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature and the
 representatives of the people of Ghana and other high per-
 sonages, the Oath of Allegiance and the Presidential Oath
 set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.   SECOND
 SCHEDULE.
 37. (1) The executive authority of Ghana shall vest in Tm
 the President and shall be exercised in accordance with the mmm
 provisions of this Constitution.                       OF GHANA.
 (2) The executive authority of Ghana shall extend
 to the execution and maintenance of this Constitution and
 to all matters with respect to which Parliament has for the
 time being power to make laws.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the function conferred upon the President by the provisions
 of clause (1) of this article may be exercised by him either
 directly or through officers subordinate to him.
 (4) All executive acts of the Government shall be
 expressed to be taken in the name of the President.
 (5) Any constitutional or statutory instrument or
 any other instrument made, issued or executed in the
 name of the President shall be authenticated by the signa-
 ture of a Minister and the validity' of any such instrument
 which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on
 the grounds that it is not made, issued or executed by the
 President.
 38. (1) In the performance of his functions under this 
 Constitution, the President shall act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or a Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet, except in cases where he is required by this Constitution to act in accordance with the advice of any person or authority, other than the Cabinet, or to act
 
 37
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 in consultation with any other person or authority or in his
 own discretion or without the advice or consultation of any
 person or authority.
 (2) The President shall not leave Ghana without the
 consent of the Cabinet.
 (3) Whenever the President dies, resigns, is removed
 from office or is absent from Ghana or is by reason of
 illness unable to perform the functions of his office, the
 Speaker of the National Assembly shall perform those
 functions until the assumption of office of the President
 or the President is able to perform those functions.
 (4) The Speaker of the National Assembly shall,
 before commencing to perform the functions of the Presi-
 dent under the provisions of this article, take and subscribe
 SECOND the Oath in relation thereto set out in the Second Schedule
 SC**U.   to this Constitution.
 PUBUC       39. There shall be a Public Seal and a Presidential
 ^ENAL    Seal, the use and custody of which shall, subject to the
 SEALS.    provisions of this Constitution, be regulated by law.
 QUA.LmCA-   40. No person shall be qualified for election as the
 nONS OF   President of Ghana unless
 PRESIDENT.
 (a) he is, by birth, a citizen of Ghana, and does
 not in any way owe allegiance to any other
 country; and
 (b) he has attained the age of forty years; and
 (c) he is sufficiently educated to undertake and
 perform the functions of President of Ghana;
 and
 (d) he is, at the time of his election, not a member
 of the presidential electoral college; and
 (e) he is a person who is otherwise qualified to be
 elected a member of the National Assembly.
 ELECTON OF 41. (1) A person shall not be a candidate in a presidential
 PRESIDEr.  election unless he is nominated for election as President by
 a document which
 (a) is signed by him; and
 
 38
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) is signed by ten members of the presidential
 electoral college; and
 (c) is delivered to the presiding officer before the
 ballot is ordered to be taken.
 (2) A member of the presidential electoral college
 shall be entitled to nominate only one candidate for the
 election of a President.
 (3) The President shall be elected without debate by
 secret ballot by a presidential electoral college consisting of
 (a) all the members of the National Assembly: and
 (b) as many Chiefs as are elected by the Houses of
 Chiefs of the Regions, each House of Chiefs
 of the Region having power to elect only three
 Chiefs from among the Chiefs of each such
 House; and
 (c) as many members as are elected by the District
 Councils in each Region, so however that all
 the District Councils in each Region shall have
 power to elect only fifteen members to the
 presidential electoral college.
 (4) No person shall be elected as a member of the
 presidential electoral college who is not qualified to be
 elected as a member of the National Assembly.
 (5) The election of the President shall, subject to
 the provisions of this Constitution, be conducted in accor-
 dance with such Regulations as may be prescribed in
 that behalf by constitutional instrument by the Electoral
 Commissioner and shall be held so as to begin,
 (a) where a President is in office after the begin-
 ning of the period of four months ending with
 the date when his term of office expires by the
 effluxion of time, during the first three months
 of that period; and
 (b) in any other case, during the period of three
 months beginning with the date when the
 office of President becomes vacant; and
 shall be held at such place and shall begin on such date as
 the presiding officer shall, by constitutional instrument,
 specify.
 
 39
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) A person shall not be elected as President of
 Ghana unless at the presidential election the number of
 votes cast in his favour is not less than one-half of the
 number of the total membership of the presidential electoral
 college.
 (7) Where at the election of the President there are
 three or more candidates and no candidate is declared
 elected, the candidate receiving the smallest number of
 votes shall not be a candidate in any subsequent ballot
 taken for the election of the President.
 (8) Where at the election of the President there are
 three or more candidates and the same number of votes are
 cast in favour of any two or more of the candidates a
 further ballot shall be taken for the purposes of determining
 which of such three or more candidates shall not be a candi-
 date for a subsequent ballot.
 (9) An instrument which
 (a) is executed under the hand and seal of the
 presiding officer, and
 (b) states that the person named in the instrument
 was declared elected as the President of Ghana
 at the election of the President by the presi-
 dential electoral college,
 shall be prima facie evidence that the person named was so
 elected.
 (10) The Speaker of the National Assembly shall be
 the presiding officer for the election of the President under
 the provisions of this article.
 cHAMNO-   42. (1) The validity of the election of the President may
 *        be challenged only by a citizen of Ghana who may present
 TION OF    ecalne       nyb      iizno     hn    h    a   rsn
 FRMESWr.  a petition in that behalf to the Supreme Court within seven
 days of the declaration of the result of the election in respect
 of which the petition is presented.
 (2) A declaration by the Supreme Court that the
 election of the President is not valid shall be without
 prejudice. to anything done by the President before that
 declaration.
 
 40
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Where the Supreme Court declares an election
 of the President to be invalid the presiding officer shall
 summon the presidential electoral college which elected the
 President whose election was called in question to elect a
 new President.
 (4) The election of a person as President shall not be
 called in question on the grounds of the existence of any
 vacancy, for whatever reason, among the members of the
 presidential electoral college electing him.
 (5) The Rules of Court Committee shall, by constitu-
 tional instrument, make Rules of Court for the practice
 and procedure for petitions to the Supreme Court challeng-
 ing the election of a President.
 43. The Electoral Commissioner shall, by constitutional T PREM-
 instrument, make Regulations for the purposes of giving noN an
 effect to the principles and provisions of article 41 of this
 Constitution.
 44. (1) A  person elected as President shall, subject to 
 the provisions of clause (3) of this article, hold office for a 
 term of four years beginning with the date on which he is
 elected as President, or where another person holds office
 as the President on that date, his term of office shall begin
 with the date next following the date on which that office
 next becomes vacant.
 (2) No person shall be elected to hold office as
 President of Ghana for a third term.
 (3) The office of President shall become vacant
 (a) on the expiration of the period specified in
 clause (1) of this article; or
 (b) if the incumbent dies or resigns from the
 office or ceases to hold office pursuant to the
 provisions of article 47 of this Constitution.
 (4) The President may, by writing under his hand
 addressed to the Speaker of the National Assembly, resign
 from his high office of President.
 
 41
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) A President shall not, on retiring from office as
 President, hold any office of profit or emolument in any
 establishment either directly or indirectly, other than that
 of the State or his own.
45. The President shall, acting in accordance with the
advice of the Cabinet, deliver to the National Assembly a
 message on the state of Ghana.
46. The President shall not, while he continues in office as President, hold any other office of profit or emolument whether private or public and either directly or
 indirectly.
 REMOVAL OF  47. (1) The President shall be removed from office if he is
 PRESIDENT.  found, in accordance with the provisions of this article,
 (a) to have acted in willful violation of any pro-
 vision of this Constitution; or
 (b) to have conducted himself in a manner
 (i) which brings or is likely to bring the
 high office of President into hatred,
 ridicule or contempt; or
 (ii) prejudicial or inimical to the security of
 the State; or
 (c) to be incapable of performing the functions
 of his office by reason of physical or mental
 incapacity.
 (2) For the purposes of the removal from office of
 the President, a notice in writing
 (a) signed by not less than one-third of all the
 members of the National Assembly, and
 (b) stating that the conduct or the physical or
 mental capacity of the President be investigated
 on any of the grounds specified in the preceding
 clause
 shall be given to the Speaker who shall immediately inform
 the Chief Justice and deliver to him the said notice.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of the next succeeding
 clause the Chief Justice shall, by constitutional instrument,.
 forthwith convene a tribunal consisting of three Justices
 
 42
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 of the Supreme Court including the most senior Justice
 of the Supreme Court, who shall be chairman, which
 tribunal shall inquire, in camera, whether there is a prima
 fade case for the removal of the President.
 (4) The Chief Justice shall not be a member of the
 tribunal constituted under the provisions of the immediately
 preceding clause.
 (5) The notice referred to in clause (2) of this article
 shall be accompanied by a statement in writing setting
 out in detail the facts, supported by the necessary docu-
 ments, on which it is claimed that the conduct of the Presi-
 dent be investigated for the purposes of his removal from
 office.
 (6) The proceedings for the removal of the President
 (a) shall be by a tribunal consisting of,
 (i) the Chief Justice as Chairman;
 (ii) four of the most senior of the Justices
 of the Supreme Court none of whom
 was a member of the tribunal consti-
 tuted under the provisions of clause (3)
 of this article; and
 (iii) three persons each appointed respec-
 tively by the Prime Minister, the Leader
 of the Opposition and the National
 House of Chiefs who shall assist the
 tribunal as assessors;
 (b) shall be held in public, so however, that the
 Chief Justice shall have power to order a
 sitting in camera in the interest of the State
 or the orderly progress of the proceedings of
 the tribunal.
 (7) The Rules of Court Committee may, by consti-
 tutional instrument, make Rules for the practice and
 procedure for the removal of the President.
 (8) The President shall be entitled during the pro-
 ceedings for his removal to be heard in defence either by
 himself or by Counsel of his own choice
 
 43
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (9) Where a notice under the provisions of clause (2)
 of this article is delivered to the Chief Justice in respect of
 the removal from office of the President on the grounds of
 physical or mental incapacity, the Chief Justice shall, after
 consultation with the professional Head of the Ghana
 Medical Services, convene a medical board which shall con-
 sist of not less than four eminent medical specialists.
 (10) The President shall submit himself for examina-
 tion by the medical board within fourteen days of the
 appointment of the board.
 (11) The findings of the medical board shall be
 submitted to the tribunal referred to in paragraph (a) of
 clause (6) of this article which shall thereupon take a deci-
 sion whether the President is, by reason of physical or
 mental incapacity, unable to perform the functions of his
 office.
 (12) The findings of the tribunal for the removal of
 the President on any of the grounds specified in clause (1)
 of this article shall be submitted to the Speaker of the
 National Assembly who shall, as soon as possible, announce
 them to a meeting of the National Assembly summoned to
 meet in that behalf, and shall thereafter cause the findings
 to be published in the Gazette.
 (13) The President shall cease to hold office as Pre-
 sident on the publication in the Gazette of the findings of
 the tribunal that he be removed from office.
 48. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 38 of
 MENT" BY
 THE PRESI- this Constitution, and save as otherwise provided in this
 DENT.     Constitution, the President shall have power, in consulta-
 tion with the Council of State, to appoint, in accordance
 with the provisions of this Constitution or any other law
 governing the same,
 (a) the Auditor-General;
 
 44
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) a sole Commissioner or the chairman and the
 other members of any Commission established
 by this Constitution;
 (c) the Ombudsman;
 (d) the chairman and the other members of the
 governing body of any corporation established
 by an Act of Parliament, a statutory instru-
 ment, or out of public funds for wireless broad-
 casting, television, the press or other media
 for mass communication, or information.
 49. Notwithstanding the provisions of article 38 of this Amr
 MENTS ON
 Constitution, the President shall, acting in accordance with ADVIC.
 the advice of the Prime Minister and in accordance with
 the provisions of this Constitution or any other law govern-
 ing the same, appoint
 (a) the Governor and the other members of the
 governing body of any bank, banking or
 financial institution, and
 (b) the Chairman and other members of the
 Council for higher education, and
 (c) save as otherwise provided in paragraph (d)
 of article 48 of this Constitution, the chairman
 and the other members of the governing body
 of any corporation,
 established by an Act of Parliament, a statutory instrument
 or out of public funds.
 50. (1) The President may, acting in consultation with PREROGATIVE
 the Council of State                                  0F MERCY.
 (a) grant to any person concerned in or convicted
 of any offence a pardon either free or subject
 to lawful conditions; or
 45
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite
 or for a specified period, for the execution of
 any punishment imposed on that person for
 any offence; or
 (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for
 any punishment imposed on any person for
 any offence; or
 (d) remit the whole or part of any punishment
 imposed on any person or of any penalty or
 forfeiture otherwise due to Government on
 account of any offence.
 (2) Where any person has been sentenced to death
 for any offence a written report of the case from the trial
 Judge together with such other information derived from
 the record of the case or elsewhere as may be necessary
 shall be submitted to the President.
 (3) For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared
 that any reference in this article to a conviction or the
 imposition of a punishment, penalty, sentence or forfeiture
 includes a conviction or the imposition of a punishment,
 penalty, sentence or forfeiture by a court-martial.
 PROFFSSIONAL  51. (1) The President shall, by constitutional instru-
 ORGANISA-  ment, make Regulations for the registration of professional
 'IONS.    bodies.
 (2) Regulations made pursuant to the provisions of
 the preceding clause shall provide
 (a) for the recognition by the President of any
 such body as is registered;
 (b) that no person shall practise as a member of a
 profession unless he shall have been duly
 registered pursuant to the Regulations so
 made; and
 (c) for the right of a professional body so
 registered to promulgate rules and regulations
 governing the admission, and the code of ethics,
 of its members compatible with its traditions.
 
 46
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) The President shall, acting in accordance with the
 advice of a professional body recognised by him, establish
 by constitutional instrument, the governing body of any such
 professional body which shall regulate and supervise the
 practice of the profession concerned.
 (4) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "professional body" includes a society, an institution, or
 group of persons, by whatever name called, the members of
 which are
 (a) trained and qualified in a profession recog-
 nised as such, and,
 (b) united in a common interest for the purposes
 of pursuing research and other activities con-
 cerned with the progress of knowledge in any
 such profession and for maintaining and
 advancing a code of ethics and conduct
 among its< members and generally for the
 maintenance of the highest standards compat-
 ible with the ideals and principles of the pro-
 fession concerned.
 52. (1) The salaries of the Judges of the Superior Court DTrmINA-
 of Judicature, of the Auditor-General, the Electoral Com- now OF
 . . CERTAIN
 missioner, the members of the Public Services Commission EMOLU*
 and of the Ombudsman, being salaries charged upon the mENTs.
 Consolidated Fund, shall be determined by the President
 acting in consultation with the Council of State on the
 recommendations of a committee appointed in that behalf
 by the President acting in consultation with the Council of
 State.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "salaries" includes pension and gratuity and other allow-
 ances payable.
 The Council of State
 53. (1) There shall be a Council of State to aid and couNcOn.F
 counsel the President which shall consist of          STATS.
 
 47
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (a) the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the National
 Assembly, the Leader of the Opposition and
 the President of the National House of Chiefs;
 (b) not more than four persons each of whom
 shall have held the office of President, or
 Chief Justice, or Speaker of the National
 Assembly, or Prime Minister under this Consti-
 tution, and who did not retire or leave office in
 disreputable or other circumstances importing
 moral turpitude, able and willing to act as a
 member of the Council of State, as the Presi-
 dent may in his discretion appoint; and
 (c) such other persons not being more than
 eight in number, of whom at least two shall
 be women and not more than four shall be
 Chiefs, as may be appointed by the President
 in his discretion to be members of the Council
 of State,
 all of whom shall be persons who are citizens of Ghana.
 (2) A member of the Council of State shall, at the
 first meeting thereof which he attends as a member, take
 and subscribe the oath of secrecy and the oath of a
 SECOND   Councillor of State set out in the Second Schedule to this
 SCHEDULE.  Constitution.
 (3) A member of the Council of State appointed by
 the President, unless he previously resigns by writing under
 his hand and addressed to the President, becomes per-
 manently incapacitated, is removed from office or dies,
 shall hold office until the successor of the President by
 whom he was appointed shall have entered upon the duties
 of his office.
 (4) The President may, acting in consultation with
 the Council of State, by warrant under his hand and Seal
 terminate the appointment of any member of the Council
 of State holding office by virtue of the provisions of para-
 graphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this article.
 (5) Meetings of the Council of State may be convened
 and presided over by the President at such times and places
 as he shall determine.
 
 48
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) The Council of State shall form part of the
 Office of the President.
 The National Security Council
 54. (1) There shall be established a National Security c
 Council which shall consist of                          NATIONAL
 SECURITY
 (a) the Prime Minister;                         COUNCIL.
 (b) the Ministers for the time being holding the
 portfolios of foreign affairs, defence, interior,
 finance and the Attorney-General; and
 (c) such other persons as may be appointed by the
 National Security Council.
 (2) The Prime Minister shall preside at any meeting
 of the National Security Council and in the absence of the
 Prime Minister, such other member of the Council as the
 Prime Minister may designate shall preside.
 (3) The Prime Minister may, acting in consultation
 with the National Security Council, invite such persons as
 he may consider necessary for any deliberations of the
 Council.
 (4) The National Security Council shall regulate its
 own procedure at its meetings.
 (5) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall be the Secretary
 to the National Security Council.
 55. (1) The functions of the National Security Council FuNCnoNs
 OF THE
 shall include the taking of measures                    NATIONAL
 SECURIT
 (a) to ensure the collection of information relating cuc.
 to the national security and the integration of
 the domestic, foreign and military policies
 relating thereto so as to enable the military
 
 49
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 services and other departments and agencies of
 the Government to co-operate more effectively
 in matters relating to the national security; and
 (b) to assess and appraise the objectives, com-
 mitments and risks of Ghana in relation to
 the actual and potential military power in the
 interest of national security; and
 the consideration of policies on matters of common interest
 to the departments and agencies of the Government
 concerned with the national security, and the exercising of
 supervisory control over all such departments and agencies.
 (2) The Prime Minister shall keep the Pres'dent
 informed of the state of the security of the country and of
 the deliberations and decisions of the National Security
 Council.
 (3) Whenever a Proclamation is published pursuant
 to the provisions of article 26 of this Constitution, the
 National Security Council shall be the authority respons-
 ible, save as otherwise provided in that article and in article
 27 of this Constitution, for the taking or implementation of
 such measures as are reasonably justifiable for the purposes
 of dealing with the situation that has arisen.
 ESTABLISH-  56. No agency, establishment or other organisation con-
 MENTY   cerned with national security shall be established save as
 SERVICES.  provided for under this Constitution.
 International Relations
 INTERNA-    57. The Government of Ghana shall conduct its inter-
 oATIONS.  national affairs in consonance with the accepted principles
 of public international law and diplomacy in a manner
 consistent with the national interests of Ghana.
 DIPLOMATIC  58. (1) The President shall, acting in accordance with
 REPRESENTA*
 RRNo.     the advice of the Cabinet, appoint persons to represent
 Ghana abroad.
 
 50
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The President may receive envoys accredited to
 Ghana.
 59. (1) The President shall, acting in accordance with EXECUTION
 the advice of the Cabinet, execute or cause to be executed OF TREATIES.
 treaties, agreements or conventions in the name of Ghana.
 (2) Any treaty, agreement or convention executed
 by or under the authority of the President which relates to
 any matter within the legislative competence of the National
 Assembly shall be subject to ratification by the National
 Assembly
 (a) by the enactment of an Act of Parliament; or
 (b) by a resolution of the National Assembly
 supported by the votes of not less than one-
 half of all the members of the National
 Assembly.
 The Cabinet
 60. (1) There shall be a Prime Minister who shall be 
 appointed by the President in accordance with the provisions of this article and who shall, before entering upon
 the duties of his office, take and subscribe the Oath of the
 Prime Minister set out in the Second Schedule to this SECOND
 Constitution.                                         SCHEDULF.
 (2) The President shall, within seven days of his election
 or of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Prime Minis-
 ter or following a general election, appoint as Prime Minister
 the leader in the National Assembly of the party having a
 numerical strength which consists of a majority of all the
 members of the National Assembly.
 (3) Where there is no party in the National Assembly
 having a numerical strength which consists of a majority
 of all the members of the Assembly the President shall
 propose for election as Prime Minister by the National
 Assembly without debate the member of the Assembly who
 appears to the President as the person most likely to com-
 mand the support of the majority of the members of the
 National Assembly.
 
 51
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where the person proposed by the President
 under the provisions of the immediately preceding clause
 is not elected as Prime Minister the members of the National
 Assembly shall, within seven days of such failure to elect a
 Prime Minister, elect one of the members of the National
 Assembly as Prime Minister.
 (5) The provisions of article 82 of this Constitution
 relating to secret voting in the National Assembly shall
 apply to the election of the Prime Minister under the
 provisions of this article; and any such election shall be
 without a debate.
 (6) Where a Prime Minister is not elected under the
 preceding provisions of this article, the President shall
 dissolve the National Assembly.
 (7) The President shall appoint as Prime Minister
 the person who has been elected Prime Minister by the
 National Assembly pursuant to the provisions of clauses
 (3) and (4) of this article.
 THE CABINEr. 61. (1) There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of
 the Prime Minister and not less than eight nor more than
 seventeen other Ministers of State as may be appointed by
 the President acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Prime Minister.
 (2) The Cabinet shall determine the general policy
 of the Government and shall collectively be responsible
 to the National Assembly.
 (3) It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister
 (a) to communicate to the President decisions of
 the Cabinet relating to the administration of
 the affairs of Ghana and proposals for legis-
 lation;
 
 52
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) to furnish such information relating to the
 administration of the affairs of Ghana and
 proposals for legislation as the President may
 call for; and
 (c) to submit for the consideration of the Cabinet,
 if the President so requires, any matter which
 the President considers should be considered
 by the Cabinet.
 (4) A Minister of State or a Ministerial Secretary
 shall not, while he continues in office, hold any other office
 of profit or emolument whether private or public and either
 directly or indirectly.
 (5) In addition to the Ministers referred to in the
 preceding provisions of this article the President may,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister,
 appoint not more than ten other Ministers of State, not
 being members of the Cabinet, so however, that the total
 number of Ministers of State shall not at any time exceed
 twenty-one.
 (6) All Ministers of State shall be appointed from
 among the members of the National Assembly.
 (7) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet.
 62. A Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his OATHS.
 office unless he has taken and subscribed the Oath of
 Allegiance, the Oath of Minister of State and the Cabinet
 Oath, as the case may be, set out in the Second Schedule SECOND
 to this Constitution.                                   SCHEDULE
 63. (1) The Cabinet shall be summoned by the Prime 
 Minister who shall preside at all meetings of the Cabinet; CABINET.
 and in the absence of the Prime Minister such other Minis-
 ter as the Prime Minister may nominate shall preside.
 (2) The Cabinet shall regulate its own procedure at
 its meetings.
 
 53
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Whenever the Prime Minister
 (a) is absent from Ghana, the President shall
 authorise some other Minister nominated by
 the Prime Minister to perform the functions
 of the Prime Minister; or
 (b) is, by reason of temporary illness, unable to
 perform the functions conferred on him by
 this Constitution, the President shall, acting
 in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet,
 appoint a Minister to perform those functions;
 and that Minister, as the case may be, shall perform those
 functions until the Prime Minister resumes office.
 TENMR OF    64. (1) The office of the Prime Minister shall become
 OFFICE Of  acn
 aUS3     vacant
 (a) on the dissolution of the National Assembly;
 or
 (b) if the Prime Minister resigns from office or
 dies; or
 (c) on a vote of no confidence having been passed
 in the National Assembly against the Govern-
 ment pursuant to the relevant provisions of
 article 66 of this Constitution; or
 (d) if the Prime Minister is incapacitated by illness
 from performing the functions of his office.
 (2) The office of a Minister of State shall become
 vacant
 (a) on the dissolution of the National Assembly;
 or
 (b) if his appointment is revoked by the President,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Prime Minister; or
 (c) if he resigns from office or dies; or
 (d) if he is elected as Speaker or Deputy Speaker
 of the National Assembly; or
 (e) upon the assumption of any person to the
 office of Prime Minister.
 
 54
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a)
 of clause (1) and of paragraph (a) of clause (2) of this
 article, Ministers of State shall not vacate office as such by
 reason only of a dissolution of the National Assembly;
 and shall accordingly continue to hold office until the
 appointment by the President of a Prime Minister and the
 formation of the Cabinet.
 65. (1) The President may, acting in accordance with the MNISERIAL
 advice of the Prime Minister, appoint Ministerial Secre- SECRETARIES.
 taries from among members of the National Assembly to
 assist Ministers in the performance of their duties.
 (2) The office of a Ministerial Secretary shall become
 vacant
 (a) on the dissolution of the National Assembly;
 or
 (b) if his appointment is revoked by the President,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Prime Minister; or
 (c) if he is elected as Speaker or Deputy Speaker
 of the National Assembly or appointed a
 Minister of State; or
 (d) upon the assumption of any person to the
 office of Prime Minister; or
 (e) if he resigns from office or dies.
 66. (1) The National Assembly may pass a resolution of vom o
 no confidence in the Government.                      CONFIDENCE
 (2) A motion for the resolution referred to in the
 preceding clause shall not be moved in the National
 Assembly unless
 (a) seven days' notice shall have been given in
 accordance with the Standing Orders of the
 National Assembly; and
 (b) the notice for the motion has been signed
 by not less than one-quarter of all the members
 of the National Assembly.
 
 55
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Where the National Assembly passes a resolution
 on a vote of no confidence in-the Government by the votes
 of more than one-half of all the members of the National
 Assembly, or the Prime Minister seeks from the National
 Assembly a vote of confidence in the Government and the
 motion is not carried in favour of the Prime Minister, the
 Government shall resign and a new Prime Minister shall be
 appointed in accordance with the provisions of article 60
 of this Constitution.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the defeat of the Government on any measure before the
 National Assembly shall 'not amount to a vote of no con-
 fidence in the Prime Minister.
 DECLARATION  67. The Prime Minister, a Minister of State or a
 OF ASSETS.  Ministerial Secretary shall, on assuming office make a
 declaration in writing of his assets and liabilities to the
 President.
 The Attorney-General
 TM        68. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General who shall be
 OGNERA.L  a Minister of State and the principal legal adviser to the
 Government.
 (2) All offences prosecuted in the name of the
 Republic of Ghana shall be at the suit of the Attorney-
 General or some other person authorised by him in accor-
 dance with any law governing the same.
 (3). The Attorney-General shall have audience in all
 courts in Ghana,
 
 56
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER SEVEN
 THE LEGISLATURE
 Composition of Parliament
 69. (1) There shall be a Parliament of Ghana which shall DE PAR-
 LIAMENT
 consist of the President and a National Assembly.       OF OHANA.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the legislative power of Ghana shall vest in the Parliament
 of Ghana and shall be exercised in accordance with the
 provisions of this Constitution.
 70. The National Assembly shall consist of not less cOPosasri o
 than one hundred and forty and not more than one hun- NATONAL
 dred and fifty elected members,                         ASSEMBLY.
 71. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person QUALIFICA-
 * TONS AND
 shall be qualified to be a member of the Assembly if, and DISQUALIFI-
 shall not be so qualified unless,                       caroNs.
 (a) he is a citizen of Ghana and has attained the
 age of twenty-one years; and
 (b) he is resident in the constituency for which he
 stands as a candidate for election to the
 National Assembly or has resided, in the
 aggregate, for a period of not less than five
 years in that constituency; or
 (c) he stands, as a candidate for election to the
 National Assembly, for a constituency with
 respect to which he or his spouse is a member
 of the community comprised in the area of
 which that constituency is a part; and
 (d) he is able to speak and, unless incapacitated
 by blindness or other physical causes, to read
 the English language with a degree of pro-
 ficiency sufficient to enable him to take an
 active part in the proceedings of the Assembly.
 
 57
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) No person shall be qualified to be a member of
 the Assembly who
 (a) owes allegiance to a country other than
 Ghana; or
 (b) has been adjudged or otherwise declared
 (i) a bankrupt under any law in force in
 Ghana and has not been discharged; or
 (ii) by the report of a Commission of
 Inquiry to be incompetent to hold
 public office or that while being a public
 officer he acquired assets unlawfully, or
 defrauded the State, or misused or
 abused his office or wilfully acted in a
 manner prejudicial to the interests of the
 State; or
 (iii) to be of unsound mind or is detained
 as a criminal lunatic under any law in
 force in Ghana; or
 (c) has been convicted
 (i) for treason or for an offence involving
 the security of the State, fraud, dis-
 honesty or moral turpitude; or
 (ii) for any other offence on indictment; or
 (d) has had his property confiscated as the result
 of the findings of a Commission of Inquiry; or
 (e) is under sentence of death or other sentence
 of imprisonment imposed on him by any Court;
 or
 (f) is not qualified to be registered as an elector
 under the provisions of the electoral law; or
 (g) is disqualified for election by any law in
 force in Ghana by reason of his holding or
 acting in any office the functions of which
 involve any responsibility for or in connection
 with the conduct of any election or any res-
 ponsibility for the compilation or revision of
 any electoral register; or
 
 58
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (h) is a party to, or is a partner in a firm which
 is a party to, any contract with the Government
 of Ghana for or on account of the public
 service, and has not, within one month before
 the day of election, published in the Gazette
 a notice setting out the nature of the contract,
 and his interest or the interest therein of such
 firm; or
 (i) has been convicted of an offence relating to or
 connected with elections under any law in force
 in Ghana at any time; or
 (j) is a member of the Police or Prison Service
 or a member of the Armed Forces or a member
 of the Judicial Service or of the Civil Service;
 or
 (k) is otherwise disqualified by any law in force
 at the time of the coming into force of this
 Constitution.
 (3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (ii) of para-
 graph (b), of paragraph (c) and of paragraph (d) of clause
 (2) of this article, if five years or more have elapsed since
 the date of the conviction or the end of the sentence or the
 date of the publication of the report of the Commission
 of Inquiry that person shall not be disqualified to be a
 member of the National Assembly by reason only of the
 provisions of the said sub-paragraph or paragraph.
 72. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly THE SPEAKER.
 who shall be elected by the members of the Assembly from
 among persons who are members of the Assembly or who
 are qualified to be elected as such.
 
 59
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The, Speaker shall vacate his office
 (a) if he resigns from office by writing under his
 hand addressed to the, Clerk io the National
 Assembly; or
 (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not
 Speaker, would disqualify him for election as
 such; or
 (c) if he is removed from office by a resolution of
 the Assembly supported by the votes of not less
 than three-quarters of all the members thereof.
 (3) No business shall be transacted in the National
 Assembly other than an election to the office of Speaker at
 any time when the office of Speaker is vacant.
 (4) A person elected to the office of Speaker shall,
 before entering upon the duties of his office, take and
 subscribe before the National Assembly the Oath of
 SECOND
 SCHEDULE.  Allegiance and the Speaker's Oath set out in the Second
 Schedule to this Constitution.
 (5) The Speaker shall, on assuming office, make a
 declaration of his assets and liabilities to the President.
 (6) The Speaker shall receive such salary and
 allowances and on retirement such retiring awards as the
 President, acting in consultation with the Council of State,
 may prescribe.
 (7) The salary and allowances payable-to the! Speaker
 and any retiring awards payable to him on retirement shall
 be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (8) The salary and other, allowances payable to the
 Speaker shall not be varied to.his disadvantage during the
 tenure of his office.
 LEADER OF   73. :(1) The leader in the National Assembly of the party
 oPosmON. having the largest numerical strength in the- National
 Assembly, other than the party.,which has formed the
 Government, shall be the Leader of, the Opposition.
 
 60
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The Leader of the Opposition shall be paid a
 salary which shall be equivalent to two-thirds of the salary
 paid to the Prime Minister, and such other allowances as
 may be determined by the President, acting in accordance
 with the advice of the Council of State.
 (3) Before entering upon the duties of his office,
 the Leader of the Opposition shall take and subscribe
 before the President the oath of the Leader of the Opposi- SECOND
 tion set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.  SCHEDULE.
 74. (1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National EPUTy
 Assembly who shall be elected by the member: of the SEAKE.
 Assembly from among the members of the National
 Assembly.
 (2) The members of the National Assembly shall
 elect a person to the office of Deputy Speaker when the
 Assembly first meets after any dissolution of Parliament
 and, if the office. becomes vacant otherwise than by reason
 of a dissolution of Parliament, at the first sitting of the
 Assembly after the office becomes vacant.
 (3) The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office
 (a) if he ceases to be a member of the National
 Assembly; or
 (b) if he becomes a Minister of State, or a
 Ministerial Secretary; or
 (c) if he is removed from office by a resolution of
 the National Assembly; or
 (d) if he resigns from office.
 75. (1) Every member of the National Assembly shall TENURE OF
 OFFICE OF
 vacate his seat in the Assembly upon a dissolution of the MEMBERS.
 National Assembly.
 (2) A member of the National Assembly shall vacate
 his seat in the Assembly,
 (a) if he is elected as Speaker of the National
 Assembly; or
 
 61
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) if he ceases to be a citizen of Ghana; or
 (c) if he is absent without the permission  in
 writing of the Speaker, and he is unable
 to offer a reasonable explanation to the
 Privileges Committee, from fifteen consecutive
 sittings of the Assembly during any period that
 the National Assembly has been summoned to
 meet and continues to meet; or
 (d) if he is expelled from the Assembly after having
 been found guilty of contempt of Parliament
 by a Committee of the National Assembly; or
 (e) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not
 a member of the Assembly, would cause him
 to be disqualified for election under the pro-
 visions of article 71 of this Constitution; or
 (f) if he resigns from office as a member of the
 National Assembly; or
 (g) if he leaves the party of which he was a member
 at the time of his election to the National
 Assembly to join another party.
 (3) The provisions of paragraph (g) of the imme-
 diate preceding clause shall be without prejudice to the
 merging of parties or the formation of a coalition govern-
 nent.
 76. (1) The High Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction
 n1ON oF  to hear and determine any question whether
 QUES nONS
 A TO M-         (a) any person has been validly elected as a
 "BRSP.               member of the National Assembly or the seat
 of any member has become vacant; or
 (b) any person has been validly elected as Speaker
 of the Assembly or, having been so elected,
 has vacated the office of Speaker.
 (2) The Rules of Court Committee shall, by constitu-
 tional instrument, make Rules of Court for the practice
 and procedure of the High Court of Justice with respect to
 the jurisdiction conferred upon the High Court of Justice
 by the provisions of the preceding clause.
 
 62
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Any person aggrieved by the determination of the
 High Court of Justice pursuant to the provisions of this
 article may appeal in accordance with the Rules made under
 the provisions of the immediately preceding clause.
 77. (1) There shall be a Clerk to the National Assembly. CLERK OF THE
 NATIONAL
 (2) The Clerk to the National Assembly and the ASEMPLY
 members of his staff shall be appointed in accordance with STAFF.
 the provisions of article 140 of this Constitution relating
 to appointments to offices in the Public Service.
 (3) The Clerk to the National Assembly and the
 members of his staff shall be public servants.
 Procedure in the National Assembly
 78. (1) Every member--of the National Assembly shall, OATH TO BE
 before taking his seat therein, take and subscribe before T""'El
 the Speaker and in the presence of the members of the
 Assembly, the Oath of Allegiance and the Oath of a Member
 of the National Assembly set out in the Second Schedule SECOND
 to this Constitution.
 (2) A member may, before taking the oaths referred
 to in the preceding clause, take part in the election of the
 Speaker.
 79 There shall preside at any sitting of the National PRESEWO
 Assembly                                              NATONAL
 (a) the Speaker; or                           ASSEMALY.
 (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy
 Speaker; or
 (c) in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy
 Sp-aker, such member of the National
 Assembly, not being a Minister or a Ministerial
 Secretary, as the Assembly may elect for that
 purpose.
 80. If objection is taken by any member of the National QomUm
 Assembly present that there are present in the Assembly, n1ONAL
 besides the person presiding, less than one-third of all 'tr-
 the members of the Assembly, and after such interval as
 
 63
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly,
 the person presiding ascertains that the number of members
 present is still less than one-third of the number of all
 the members of the National Assembly he shall there-
 upon adjourn the Assembly.
 COMIrEES    81. (1) At the first meeting of the National Assembly
 NATONAL  there shall be appointed, after the election of the Speaker,
 ASSEMBLY.  and the Deputy.Speaker, the following Committees, that is
 to say,
 (a) the Public Accounts Committee;
 (b) the Business Committee;
 (c) the Standing Orders Committee;
 (d) the Committee of Privileges; and
 (e) such  other Committees of     the  National
 Assembly, as the rules of procedure of the
 National Assembly shall provide.
 (2) In addition to the Committees referred to in the
 preceding clause, the National Assembly shall appoint other
 Committees which shall perform the functions specified
 in clause (3) of this article.
 (3) It shall be the duty of any such Committees as is
 referred to in clause (2) of this article to investigate and
 inquire into the activities and administration of such
 Ministries or Departments as may be assigned to it and
 such investigation and inquiry may extend to proposals for
 legislation.
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1)
 and (2) of this article, the National Assembly may at any
 time appoint any other Committee to investigate any matter
 of public importance.
 (5) The composition of each of the Committees
 appointed pursuant to the preceding provisions of this
 article shall, as much as possible, reflect the different shades
 of opinion in the National. Assembly.
 
 64
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) Every member of the National Assembly shall be
 appointed to at least one of the Committees appointed
 under the provisions of clause (1) of this article.
 (7) For the purposes of effectively performing its
 functions each of the said Committees shall have all such
 powers, rights and privileges as are vested in the High
 Court of Justice or a Justice thereof at a trial in respect of
 (a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and
 examining them on oath, affirmation or other-
 wise;
 (b) compelling production of documents; and
 (c) the issue of a commission or request to examine
 witnesses abroad.
 82. (1) No question for decision in the National Assembly vomo
 shall be proposed for determination unless there are present IN rt"
 NATIONAL
 in the Assembly not less than one-half of all the members of ASSEMBLY.
 the Assembly, and save as otherwise provided in this
 Constitution, the question proposed shall be determined
 by the majority of the votes of the members so present and
 voting.
 (2) The Speaker shall have neither an original nor a
 casting vote and if upon any question before the Assembly
 the votes are equally divided the motion shall be lost.
 (3) There shall be secret voting in the National
 Assembly in respect of
 (a) a bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any
 provision of this Constitution; or
 (b) the election or removal of any public officer.
 (4) A member who is a party to, or is a partner in a
 firm which is a party to any contract with the Government
 shall, in any proceedings in the National Assembly relating
 to that contract, declare his interest or the interest therein of
 that firm and shall not vote on any question relating to that
 contract.
 
 65
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 UNQUALIFIED  83. Any person who sits or votes in the National
 PEST  OR  Assembly knowing or having reasonable grounds for
 VOTING, knowing that he is not entitled so to do commits an offence
 and shall be liable on conviction to such penalty as shall be
 prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 MODE OF     84. (1) The power of Parliament to make laws shall be
 EXERCISING
 LEGISLATIVE exercised by bills passed by the National Assembly and
 POWER.    assented to by the President.
 (2) No bill, other than such a bill as is referred to in
 paragraph (a) of article 85 of this Constitution, shall be
 introduced in the National Assembly unless
 (a) it is accompanied by an explanatory memo-
 randum setting out in detail the policy and
 principles of the bill, the defects of the existing
 law, the remedies proposed to deal with those
 defects and the necessity for its introduction;
 and
 (b) it has been published in the Gazette fourteen
 days before the date of its introduction in the
 National Assembly.
 (3) No bill affecting the institution of Chieftaincy
 shall be introduced in the National Assembly without prior
 consultation with the National House of Chiefs.
 (4) Whenever a bill is read the first time in the National
 Assembly, it shall be referred to the appropriate Committee
 appointed under the provisions of clause (2) of article 81
 of this Constitution which shall examine the bill in detail
 and make all such inquiries in relation thereto as the
 Committee considers expedient or necessary.
 (5) When a bill has been deliberated upon by the
 appropriate Committee it shall then be reported to the
 National Assembly and the report of the Committee
 together with the explanatory memorandum to the bill
 shall form the basis for a full debate on the bill for its
 passage, with or without amendments, or its rejection, by
 the National Assembly.
 (6) When a bill passed by the National Assembly is
 presented to the President for assent he shall signify within
 seven days thereof to the Speaker that he assents to the bill
 or that he refuses to assent to the bill.
 
 66
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (7) Where the President refuses to assent to a bill he
 shall, within fourteen days of the refusal, state in a memo-
 randum to the Speaker any specific provisions of the bill
 which in his opinion should be reconsidered by the National
 Assembly including his recommendations for amendments;
 and the National Assembly shall reconsider the bill on the
 basis of the recommendations of the President.
 (8) If at the expiration of the period of fourteen days
 referred to in the immediately preceding clause, the National
 Assembly is not meeting, the President shall forward the
 memorandum referred to in the said clause by the first day
 of the next succeeding meeting of the National Assembly.
 (9) Where a bill reconsidered by the National
 Assembly pursuant to the provisions of the two immediately
 preceding clauses is passed, the President shall assent
 thereto.
 (10) Without prejudice to the power of Parliament
 to postpone the operation of any law, a bill shall not become
 law until it has been duly passed and assented to in accor-
 dance with the provisions of this Constitution and shall not
 come into force unless it has been published in the Gazette.
 (11) The provisions of clauses (6) to (9) inclusive of
 this article shall not apply to a bill certified by the Speaker
 as a bill to which the provisions of article 85 of this Constitu-
 tion apply; and accordingly the President shall give his
 assent to any such bill when presented for assent.
 (12) Where it is determined by a Committee of the
 National Assembly appointed in that behalf that a parti-
 cular bill is of an urgent nature, the provisions of the preced-
 ing clauses of this article, other than clause (1) and paragraph
 (a) of clause (2), shall not apply, and accordingly the President
 shall give his assent thereto on its presentation for assent.
 85. The National Assembly shall not, unless the bill is RESTRIC-
 introduced or the motion is introduced by a Minister,   REGA RT
 (a) proceed upon any bill including any amend- EEO
 ment to a bill, that, in the opinion of the person FINANCIAL
 presiding, makes provision for any of the MERS.
 following, that is to say,
 
 67
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (i) the imposition of taxation or the altera-
 tion of taxation otherwise than by reduc-
 tion; or
 (ii) the imposition of any charge upon the
 Consolidated - Fund or other public
 funds of Ghana or the alteration of any
 such charge otherwise than by reduction;
 or
 (iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from
 the Consolidated Fund or other public
 funds of Ghana of any moneys 'not
 charged upon the Consolidated Fund
 or any increase, in the amount of such
 payment, issue or withdrawal; or
 (iv) the composition or remission of any
 debt due to the Government of Ghana;
 or
 (b) proceed  upon any motion, including any
 amendment to a motioni, the effect of, which,
 in the opinion of the person presiding, would
 be to make provision for any of those purposes.
 STANDING   86. (1) Subject to the provisions. of this Constitution,
 ORDERS the National Assembly may regulate its own procedure.
 OF THE
 NATIONAL       (2) The National Assembly may act notwithstanding
 ASSEMBLY.*             **                  -
 any vacancy in its membership, including any vacancy not
 filled when the Assenibly first meets after any' dissolution
 of the National Assembly, and the presence or participation
 of any person not entitled to be .present or to participate
 in the proceedings of the Assembly shall not invalidate
 those proceedings.
 Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution, etc.
 SESSIONS OF  87. (1) Each session of Parliament shall be held at. such
 PARLIAMENT. place within Ghana and shall commence at such time as the
 President may, by constitutional instrument, appoint.
 (2) There shall be a session of Parliament at least
 once in every year so however that a period of twelve months
 shall not intervene between the last sitting of Parliament in
 one session and the first sitting thereof in the next session.
 
 68
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Subject to the provisions of clause (5) of this
 article, whenever the National Assembly is dissolved a
 general election of the members of the National Assembly
 shall be held within sixty days of the date of the dissolution
 and a session of the National Assembly shall be appointed
 to commence within fourteen days of the general election.
 (4) Whenever any other vacancy occurs in the
 National Assembly a by-election shall be held within thirty
 days of the vacancy occurring.
 (5) If, after a dissolution of the National Assembly
 and before the holding of the general election of members
 of the National Assembly, the President is satisfied that
 owing to the existence of a state of war or of a state of
 public emergency in Ghana or any part thereof, it is neces-
 sary to recall Parliament, the President shall summon the
 National Assembly that has been dissolved to meet, but,
 unless the life of the National Assembly is extended under
 the provisions of clause (3) of article 88 of this Constitution,
 the general election of members of the National Assembly
 shall proceed and the National Assembly that has been
 recalled shall, if not sooner dissolved, again stand dissolved
 on the date appointed for the nomination of candidates
 for that general election.
 (6) Whenever the National Assembly is dissolved or
 the Cabinet resigns, that Cabinet or the Cabinet in being
 at that dissolution, as the case may be, shall be responsible
 for the administration of the affairs of Ghana until the
 appointment of a Prime Minister or the formation of a
 Cabinet.
 (7) No Minister of State remaining in office by
 virtue of the provisions of the immediately preceding
 clause shall use or cause to be used the facilities attached
 to his office for the purposes of an election; and accordingly
 any member of any such Cabinet who wilfully violates the
 provisions of this clause shall be deemed to have committed
 an offence in relation to the election concerned.
 (8) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 article, any twenty members of the National Assembly may
 request a meeting of the National Assembly and the Speaker
 shall, within seven days of the receipt of that request,
 summon the National Assembly.
 
 69
 
 
 17Te Constitution
 
 PROROGA-   88. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution
 TION AND                as.in
 DISSOLUTION. the President may, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Prime Minister, by constitutional instrument, at any
 time prorogue or dissolve the National Assembly.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this
 article, the National Assembly, unless sooner dissolved,
 shall continue for five years from the date of its first sitting
 after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved.
 (3) At any time when Ghana is actually engaged in
 operations against an enemy or in actual hostilities, the
 National Assembly may from time to time by resolution
 passed in that behalf and supported by the votes of not less
 than two-thirds of all the members of the National
 Assembly, extend the period of five years specified in clause
 (2) of this article for not more than twelve months at a
 time, so however, that the life of the National Assembly
 shall not be extended under this clause for more than five
 years.
 DECLARATION  89. A member of the National Assembly shall, as soon
 OF ASSETS.  after the taking of his oath of Office as may be practicable
 and on the dissolution of the National Assembly make
 a declaration in writing of his assets and liabilities as at
 the time of his taking the oath and at the time of the
 dissolution to the Speaker.
 ALLOWANCES  90. (1) The office of a member of the National Assembly
 FOR MEM-  shall not be a paid office.
 NATIONAL       (2) Subject to the provisions of the preceding clause,
 ASSEMBLY.  members of the National Assembly shall be paid such basic,
 sitting, travelling and rent allowances and other such
 allowances as may be determined by the President acting
 in consultation with the Council of State.
 (3) A Minister of State and a Ministerial Secretary
 shall be paid such salaries and other allowances as may be
 determined by the President, acting in consultation with the
 Council of State.
 (4) Any person who shall have served as a member
 of the National Assembly for a period of not less than five
 years shall be eligible, on retirement or death, for the pay-
 ment of such gratuity to him or his personal representatives,
 as the case may be, as shall be determined by the President,
 acting in consultation with the Council of State.
 
 70
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) For the purposes of the immediately preceding
 clause, the period of five years specified therein shall be
 interpreted to mean five continuous years, and accordingly
 any period when the member is out of office, otherwise than
 by dissolution of the National Assembly as such, shall not
 be taken into account.
 Privileges and Immunities
 91. There shall be freedom of speech, debate and pro- FREEDOM OF
 ceedings in the National Assembly and that freedom shall SPEECH AND
 PROCEED-
 not be impeached or questioned in any Court or place out IoS.
 of the Assembly.
 92. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, but  -
 without prejudice to the generality of the immediately pre-
 ceding article, no civil or criminal proceedings shall be 
 instituted against a member of the National Assembly in 
 any Court or place out of the Assembly by reason of any-
 thing said by him in the Assembly or any matter or thing
 brought by him in or before the Assembly by petition, bill,
 motion or otherwise.
 (2) Whenever in the opinion of the person presiding
 in the National Assembly a statement made by a member is
 prima facie defamatory of any person, the person presiding
 shall refer the matter for inquiry to the Committee of
 Privileges which shall report its findings to the Assembly
 not later than thirty days of the matter being so referred.
 (3) Where the Committee of Privileges reports to the
 National Assembly that the statement made by the member
 is defamatory of any person, the member who made the
 statement shall, within seven days of that report, render
 an' apology 'at the bar of the Assembly, the terms of which
 shall be approved by the Committee of Privileges and
 communicated to the person who has been defamed.
 (4) Where a member refuses to render an apology
 pursuant to the provisions of the immediately preceding
 clause, the Speaker shall suspend that member for the
 duration of the session of Parliament in which the defama-
 tory statement was made, and a member so suspended
 shall lose his parliamentary privileges, immunities and
 
 71
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 remuneration which shall be restored to him if at any time
 before the end of the session he renders the apology as
 required under the provisions of clause (3) of this article.
 (5) Any person who may have made a contempo-
 raneous report of the proceedings in the National Assembly
 including a statement which has been the subject of an
 inquiry pursuant to the provisions of clause (2) of this
 article shall publish the apology referred to in clause (3)
 of this article or the suspension or the apology referred to
 in the immediately preceding clause with the same pro-
 minence as he published the first report; and if any such
 person fails to publish that apology he shall not be protected
 by privilege.
 93. No civil or criminal process issuing from any Court
 or place out of the National Assembly shall be served on
 or executed in relation to the Speaker or a member or the
 Clerk to the National Assembly while he is on his way to,
 attending at or returning from any proceedings of the
 Assembly.
 94. (1) Neither the Speaker nor any member of, nor the
 Clerk to, the National Assembly shall be compelled, while
 attending the Assembly, to appear as a witness in any Court
 or place out of the Assembly.
 (2) The certificate of the Speaker that a member or
 the Clerk is attending the proceedings of the National
 Assembly shall be conclusive evidence of attendance at
 the Assembly.
 95. Neither the Speaker nor any member of, nor the Clerk
 to, the National Assembly shall be required to serve on a
 jury in any Court or place out of the Assembly.
 IMMUNITY   96. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no
 LICATION OF person shall be under any civil or criminal liability in respect
 PROCEED-  of the publication of
 INGS.            (a) the text or a summary of any report, papers,
 minutes, votes or proceedings of the National
 Assembly, or
 (b) a contemporaneous report of the proceedings
 of the National Assembly,
 
 72
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 unless it is shown that the publication was effected mali-
 ciously or otherwise in want of good faith.
 97. (1) Every person summoned to attend to give evidence Rm.EGES
 or to produce any paper, book, record or other document OF
 before the National Assembly shall be entitled, in respect
 of his evidence, or the production of the said document,
 as the case may be, to the same privileges as if he were
 appearing before a Court.
 (2) No public officer shall be required to produce
 before the National Assembly any document if
 (a) the Speaker certifies that
 (i) the document belongs to a class of
 documents which it is injurious to the
 public interest to produce, or
 (ii) disclosure of the contents thereof will be
 injurious to the public interest; or
 (b) the National Security Council certifies that
 (i) the document belongs to a class of
 documents which it is prejudicial to the
 security of the State to produce, or
 (ii) disclosure of the contents thereof will
 be prejudicial to the security of the State.
 (3) Where there is a doubt as to whether any docu-
 ment as is referred to in the immediately preceding clause
 is injurious to the public interest or prejudicial to the
 security of the State, the Speaker or the National Security
 Council, as the case may be, shall refer the matter to the
 Supreme Court for determination by the Supreme Court
 whether the production or the disclosure of the contents
 of any such document would be injurious to the public
 interest or prejudicial to the security of the State.
 (4) An answer by a person to a question put by the
 National Assembly shall not be admissible in evidence
 against him in any civil or criminal proceedings out of the
 Assembly, not being proceedings for perjury brought under
 the criminal law.
 
 73
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 Contempt of Parliament
 GENERAL     98. Any act or omission which obstructs or impedes the
 CONTEMPT.  National Assembly in the performance of its functions or
 which obstructs or impedes any member or officer thereof
 in the discharge of his duties or affronts the dignity of the
 Assembly or which tends either directly or indirectly to
 produce such a result shall be contempt of Parliament.
 CRuMINAL 99. Where an act or omission which constitutes contempt
 PROCEEDINGS of Parliament is an offence under the criminal law, the
 exercise by the National Assembly of the power to punish
 for contempt shall not be a bar to the institution of pro-
 ceedings under the criminal law.
 
 74
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER EIGHT
 THE OMBUDSMAN
 100. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, ESTABLISH-
 Parliament shall, not later than one year from the coming OMBUDSMAN.
 into force of this Constitution, by an Act of Parliament
 provide for the appointment of a person to be known as the
 Ombudsman who may investigate any action taken by, or
 on behalf of,
 (a) any Department or Ministry of State,
 (b) any member of the Armed Forces,
 (c) any statutory corporation set up entirely
 or partly out of public funds or funds provided
 by Parliament, including institutions of higher
 education, or
 (d) any member of the Public Services,
 being an action taken in the exercise of the administrative
 functions of that Department, Ministry, corporation,
 authority or person.
 (2) The Ombudsman shall not investigate
 (a) any matter which is sub judice before a Court
 or judicial tribunal; or
 (b) any matter involving the relations or dealings
 between the Government of Ghana and any
 other Government or an international organi-
 sation; or
 (c) any matter relating to the exercise of the
 prerogative of mercy.
 101. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, an OTHER FUNC-
 . - * TONS AND
 Act of Parliament enacted pursuant to the provisions of POERS OF
 clause (1) of article 100 of this Constitution shall  THE OMBUDS-
 MAN.
 (a) specify the matters which shall be subject to
 investigation by the Ombudsman; and
 (b) provide for the establishment of regional and
 district offices of the Ombudsman; and
 
 75
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) set out the procedure for the lodging of com-
 plaints and the procedure in respect of investi-
 gations; and
 (d) specify the powers of the Ombudsman in
 respect of
 (i) the furnishing of information and the
 production of documents to the
 Ombudsman;
 (ii) the attendance and examination of wit-
 nesses; and
 (iii) the institution of civil proceedings and
 the making of recommendations in
 respect of appropriate remedies;
 and generally for the purposes of enabling the
 Ombudsman to perform the functions con-
 ferred upon him by this Constitution or any
 other law.
 (2) The Ombudsman shall, in each session of
 Parliament, submit a report to the National Assembly
 which shall contain a summary of the matters investigated,
 and the action taken thereon by him during the preceding
 session of Parliament.
 
 76
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER NINE
 THE JUDICIARY
 The Superior Court ofJudicature
 102. (1) The judicial power of Ghana shall be vested in
 the Judiciary of which the Chief Justice shall be the Head;
 and accordingly no organ or agency of the executive shall
 be given any final judicial power.
 (2) The Judiciary shall have jurisdiction in all
 matters civil and criminal including matters relating to this
 Constitution, and such other matters in respect of which
 Parliament may by or under an Act of Parliament confer
 jurisdiction on the Judiciary.
 (3) In the exercise of the judicial power of Ghana
 the Judiciary in both its judicial and administrative functions
 shall be subject only to this Constitution and shall not be
 subject to the control or direction of any other person or
 authority.
 (4) The Judiciary shall consist of the Supreme
 Court of Ghana, the Court of Appeal and the High Court
 of Justice which shall be the superior courts of record and
 which shall constitute one Superior Court of Judicature,
 and such other inferior and traditional Courts as Parliament
 may by law establish.
 (5) The Superior Court of Judicature shall have
 the power to commit for contempt to themselves and all
 such powers as were vested in a court of record immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution.
 (6) Save as may be otherwise ordered by a Court in
 the interests of public morality, public safety or public
 order, all proceedings of every Court, including the an-
 nouncement of the decision of the Court, shall be held in
 public.
 (7) Nothing contained in the immediately preceding
 clause shall prevent a Court from excluding from the proceedings persons, other than the parties thereto and their Counsel to such an extent as the Court may consider
 necessary or expedient,
 (a) in circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice or any interlocutory proceedings; or
 (b) in the interests of defence, public safety, public
 morality, the welfare of persons under the age
 of majority or the protection of the private
 lives of persons concerned in the proceedings.
 (8) In the exercise of the judicial power conferred
 upon the Judiciary by this Constitution or any other law,
 the Superior Court of Judicature shall have power, in
 relation to any matter within its jurisdiction, to issue such
 orders as may be necessary to ensure the enforcement of
 any judgment, decree or order of the Court.
 (9) A Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature
 shall not be liable to any action or suit for any matter or
 thing done by him in the performance of his function as
 such Judge.
 The Supreme Court
 COMPOSITION 103. 
(1) The Supreme Court shall consist of
 (a) the Chief Justice who shall be the President thereof;
 (b) not less than six other Justices of the Supreme Court; and
 (c) such other Justices of the Superior Court of
 Judicature not being more in number than the
 number of Justices of the Supreme Court
 sitting as such, as the Chief Justice may, for the
 determination of any particular cause or
 matter by writing under his hand, request to
 sit in the Supreme Court for such period as the
 Chief Justice may specify or until the request
 is withdrawn.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall, save as otherwise
 provided in article 108 of this Constitution, be duly constituted for the despatch of its business by not less than
 five Justices thereof.
 
 78
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) The Chief Justice shall preside at the sittings of
 the Supreme Court and in his absence the most senior of
 the Justices of the Supreme Court as constituted for the
 time being shall preside.
 104. (1) The Supreme Court shall be the final court of 
 appeal in and for Ghana and shall have such appellate and 
 other jurisdiction as may be conferred upon it by this 
 Constitution or any other law.
 (2) The Supreme Court may, while treating its own
 previous decisions as normally binding, depart from a
 previous decision when it appears right so to do; and all
 other Courts shall be bound to follow the decisions of the
 Supreme Court on questions of law.
 (3) For the purposes of hearing and determining any
 matter within its jurisdiction and the amendment, execution
 or the enforcement of any judgment or order made on any
 such matter, and for the purposes of any other authority,
 expressly or by necessary implication given to the Supreme
 Court by this Constitution or any other law, the Supreme
 Court shall have all the powers, authority and jurisdiction
 vested in any Court established by this Constitution or any
 other law.
 105. (1) An appeal shall lie from a judgment, decree or APPELLATE
 JURIDIC-
 order of the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court,    ON OF THE
 (a) as of right, in any civil cause or matter where sR
 the amount or value of the subject matter of
 the dispute is not less than such an amount as
 may be determined by Parliament; or
 (b) as of right, in any criminal cause or matter
 in respect of which an appeal has been brought
 to the Court of Appeal from a judgment, decree
 or order of the High Court of Justice in the
 exercise of its original jurisdiction; or
 
 79
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) with the leave of the Court of Appeal, in any
 other cause or matter, civil or criminal, where
 the Court of Appeal is satisfied that the case
 involves a substantial question of law or is of
 public importance.
 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding
 clause, the Supreme Court shall have power to entertain
 any application for special leave to appeal in any cause or
 matter, civil or criminal, to the Supreme Court, and to grant
 such leave accordingly.
 (3) The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdic-
 tion to hear and determine any matter which has been
 determined by the National House of Chiefs.
 (4) The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdic-
 tion, to the exclusion of the Court of Appeal, to hear and
 determine any matter relating to the conviction of any
 person for treason by the High Court of Justice.
 ORIGINAL    106. (1) The Supreme Court shall, save as otherwise
 JURISDICTION
 OF THn    provided in article 28 of this Constitution, have original
 COURTE   jurisdiction, to the exclusion of all other Courts,
 (a) in all matters relating to the enforcement or
 interpretation of any provision of this Con-
 stitution; and
 (b) where any question arises whether an enact-
 ment was made in excess of the powers
 conferred upon Parliament or any other
 authority or person by law or under this Con-
 stitution.
 (2) Where any question relating to any matter or
 question as is referred to in the preceding clause arises in
 any proceedings in any Court, other than the Supreme
 Court, that Court shall stay the proceedings and refer the
 
 80
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 question of law involved to the Supreme Court for deter-
 mination; and the Court in which the question arose shall
 dispose of the case in accordance with the decision of the
 Supreme Court.
 107. The Supreme Court shall have supervisory jurisdic- SUPERVISORY
 tion over all other Courts in Ghana and over any adjudicat- JRSDICTON
 ing authority; and in the exercise of its supervisory SURE
 jurisdiction shall have power to issue such directions,
 orders or writs including writs or orders in the nature of
 habeas corpus, certiorari, mandamus, prohibition, and quo
 warranto- as it may consider appropriate for the purposes
 of enforcing or securing the enforcement of its supervisory
 powers.
 108. A single Justice of the Supreme Court may exercise POWERS OP A
 any power vested in the Supreme Court not involving the s""o
 decision of the cause or matter before the Supreme Court, THE SUPREME
 COURT,
 save that,
 (a) in criminal matters, if any such Justice refuses
 or grants an application in the exercise of
 any such power, any person affected thereby
 shall be entitled to have the application
 determined by the Supreme Court constituted
 by three Justices thereof; and
 (b) in civil matters, any order, direction or decision
 made or given in pursuance of the powers
 conferred by this article may be varied, dis-
 charged or reversed by the Supreme Court
 constituted by three Justices thereof.
 The Court of Appeal
 109. (1) The Court of Appeal shall consist of       
 (a) the Chief Justice;                          
 (b) not less than five Justices of the Court of "
 Appeal; and
 
 81
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) such other Justices of the Superior Court of
 Judicature as the Chief Justice may, for the
 determination of any particular cause or matter
 by writing under his hand, request to sit in the
 Court of Appeal for such period as the Chief
 Justice may specify or until the request is
 withdrawn.
 (2) The Court of Appeal shall be duly constituted by
 any three Justices thereof and when so constituted the
 most senior of such Justices shall preside.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of clauses (1) and (2)
 of article 104 of this Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall
 be bound by its own previous decisions and all Courts
 inferior to the Court of Appeal shall be bound to follow the
 decisions of the Court of Appeal on questions of law.
 (4) The Chief Justice may create such Divisions of
 the Court of Appeal as he may consider necessary,
 
 (a) consisting of
 tively as may
 Justice;
 
 such number of Justices respec-
 be assigned thereto by the Chief
 
 (b) sitting at such places in Ghana
 Justice may, by constitutional
 determine; and
 
 as the Chief
 instrument,
 
 (c) presided over by the most senior of the
 Justices of the Court of Appeal constituting
 the Court.
 110. (1) The Court of Appeal shall have jurisdiction
 throughout Ghana to hear and determine, subject to the
 provisions of this article and of this Constitution, appeals
 from any judgment, decree or order of the High Court
 of Justice or any Justice thereof and such other appellate
 jurisdiction as may be conferred upon it by this Constitu-
 tion or any other law.
 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
 an appeal shall lie as of right from a judgment, decree or
 order of the High Court of Justice to the Court of Appeal
 in any cause or matter determined by the High Court of
 Justice.
 
 82
 
 JURISDICTION
 OF THE
 COURT OF
 APPEAL.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) For the purposes of hearing and determining any
 appeal within its jurisdiction and the amendment, execution
 or the enforcement of any judgment or order made on any
 such appeal, and for the purposes of any other authority
 expressly or by necessary implication given to the Court of
 Appeal by this Constitution or any other law, the Court of
 Appeal shall have all the powers, authority and jurisdiction
 vested in the Court from which the appeal is brought.
 111. A single Justice of the Court of Appeal may exercise POWERS OF A
 any power vested in the Court of Appeal not involving the "   OF
 decision of the cause or matter before the Court of Appeal, THE COURT OF
 save that,                                              APPEAL.
 (a) in criminal matters, if any such Justice refuses
 or grants an application in the exercise of any
 such power, any person affected thereby shall
 be entitled to have the application determined
 by the Court of Appeal as duly constituted; and
 (b) in civil matters, any order, direction or decision
 made or given in pursuance of the powers
 conferred by this article may be varied, dis-
 charged or reversed by the Court of Appeal as
 duly constituted.
 The High Court of Justice
 112. (1) The High Court of Justice shall consist of   coMPosIoI
 OF THE
 (a) the Chief Justice;                          man COR
 OF JUSTICE.
 (b) not less than twelve Puisne Judges; and
 (c) such other Judges of the Superior Court of
 Judicature as the Chief Justice may, for the
 determination of any. particular cause or
 matter by writing under his hand request to
 sit in the High Court of Justice for such
 period as the Chief Justice may specify or
 until the request is withdrawn.
 (2) The High Court of Justice shall be duly consti-
 tuted, as the case may be,
 (a) by any one Justice thereof; or
 
 83
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) by any one Justice thereof and a jury, in
 accordance with the provisions of paragraph
 (a) of clause (2) of article 20 of this Constitu-
 tion, for the trial of an offence, other than
 treason, the punishment for which is death or
 imprisonment for life; or
 (c) by two Justices thereof in accordance with
 Rules of Court for the determination of any
 other particular cause or matter; or
 (d) by three Justices thereof, in accordance with
 the provisions of paragraph (h) of clause (2)
 of article 20 of this Constitution, for the trial
 of any person for the offence of treason.
 (3) There shall be in the said High Court such
 Divisions consisting of such number of Justices respectively
 as may be assigned thereto by the Chief Justice; and sitting
 in such places in Ghana as the Chief Justice may determine.
 (1) The High Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction
 in civil and criminal matters and such other original,
 appellate and other jurisdiction as may be conferred upon
 it by this Constitution or any other law.
 (2) The High Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction
 to determine any matter relating to industrial and labour
 disputes and administrative complaints.
 (3) Parliament shall, by or under an Act of Parlia-
 ment, make provision for the exercise of the jurisdiction
 conferred on the High Court of Justice by the provisions
 of the immediately preceding clause.
 (4) For the purposes of hearing and determining any
 appeal within its jurisdiction and the amendment, execution
 or. the enforcement of any judgment or order made on any
 such appeal, and for the purposes of any other authority
 expressly or by necessary implication given to the High
 Court of Justice by this Constitution or any other law, the
 High Court of Justice shall have all the powers, authority
 and jurisdiction vested in the Court from which the appeal
 is brought.
 
 84
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) Any Justice of the High Court of Justice may,
 in accordance with Rules of Court made in that behalf,
 exercise in Court or in Chambers all or any part of the
 jurisdiction vested in the High Court of Justice by this
 Constitution or any other law.
 (6) The High Court of Justice shall have no power
 in a trial for the offence of treason to convict any person for
 any offence other than treason.
 114. The High Court of Justice shall have supervisory SUPERVTSORY
 jurisdiction over all inferior and traditional Courts in or Fm
 Ghana and any adjudicating authority and in the exercise HIGH COURT
 of its supervisory jurisdiction shall have power to issue OF JUSTICE.
 such directions, orders or writs including writs or orders
 in the nature of habeas corpus, certiorari, mandamus. pro-
 hibition and quo warranto as it may consider appropriate
 for the purposes of enforcing or securing the enforcement
 of its supervisory powers.
 Miscellaneous
 115. (1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the 
 President, acting in consultation with the Council of 
 State, by warrant under his hand and the Presidential Seal.                                                 
 (2) The other Judges of the Superior Court of
 Judicature shall be appointed by the President by warrant
 under his hand and the Presidential Seal acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Council.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
 as a Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature, unless he is
 entitled to practise as Counsel in a Court having unlimited
 jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in Ghana or any
 other country having a system of law analogous to that of
 Ghana and approved by the Judicial Council, and has been
 entitled as such Counsel in the case of appointment to
 (a) the Supreme Court, for not less than fifteen
 years; or
 
 85
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) the Court of Appeal, for not less than twelve
 years; or
 (c) the High Court of Justice, for not less than
 ten years.
 (4) For the purposes of the immediately preceding
 clause, a person shall be regarded as entitled to practise as
 Counsel if he has been called, enrolled or otherwise
 admitted as such and has not subsequently been disbarred
 or removed from the Roll of Counsel or legal practi-
 tioners.
 (5) Where the office of the Chief Justice is vacant or
 if the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform the
 functions of his office, then,
 (a) until a person has been appointed to and has
 assumed the functions of that office, or
 (b) until the person holding that office has resumed
 the functions of that office, as the case may be,
 those functions shall be performed by the most senior
 for the time being of the Justices of the Supreme Court.
 (6) The office of a Judge of the Superior Court of
 Judicature shall not be abolished while there is a sub-
 stantive holder thereof.
 (7) Where the office of a Justice of the High Court is
 vacant or for any reason a Justice thereof is unable to
 perform the functions of his office or if the Chief Justice
 advises the President that the state of business in the High
 Court of Justice so requires, the President may, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Judicial Council, appoint
 a person who has held office as, or a person qualified for
 appointment as, a Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature
 to act as a Justice of the High Court of Justice.
 
 86
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (8) Any person appointed under the provisions of
 clause (7) of this article to act as a Justice of the High Court
 of Justice shall continue to act for the period of his appoint-
 ment or if no such period is specified until his appointment
 is revoked by the President, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Judicial Council.
 (9) Notwithstanding the expiration of the period
 of his appointment or the revocation of his appointment
 pursuant to the provisions of the immediately preceding
 clause, a Justice so appointed may thereafter continue to
 act for as long as may be necessary to enable him to deliver
 judgment or do any other thing in relation to proceedings
 that were commenced before him previously thereto.
 116. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person TENUR oF
 holding office as a Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature OFCE.
 (a) may retire as such Justice at any time after
 attaining the age of sixty years; and
 (b) shall vacate that office on attaining the age
 of sixty-five years.
 (2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at
 which he is required by the provisions of this article to
 vacate his office, a person holding the office of a Judge of
 the Superior Court of Judicature may continue in office for
 so long after attaining that age as may be necessary to
 enable him to deliver judgment or do any other thing in
 relation to proceedings that were commenced before him
 previously thereto.
 (3) A Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature
 may be removed from office only for inability to perform
 the functions of his office, whether arising from infirmity
 
 87
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 of body or mind or for stated misbehaviour, and shall not
 be so removed save in accordance with the provisions of
 this article.
 (4) If the President is satisfied, on a petition pre-
 sented to him in that behalf, that the question of removing
 a Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature, other than the
 Chief Justice, ought to be investigated, then
 (a) the President shall refer the petition to the
 Chief Justice for inquiry by a tribunal consist-
 ing of three Judges of the Superior Court of
 Judicature appointed by the Judicial Council:
 and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and
 report the facts and the findings thereon to the
 President and recommend to the President
 whether the Judge ought to be removed under
 the provisions of this article;
 and the President shall act in accordance with the recom-
 mendations of the tribunal.
 (5) If the President is satisfied, on a petition pre-
 sented to him in that behalf, that the question of removing
 the Chief Justice ought to be investigated, then
 (a) the President shall, acting in consultation with
 the Council of State, appoint a tribunal to
 which he shall refer the petition and which
 tribunal shall consist of,
 (i) three Justices of the Supreme Court one
 of whom shall be appointed chairman
 by the President, and
 (ii) two other persons who are not members
 of the Council of State or of the National
 Assembly or legal practitioners; and
 
 88
 
 
 The Consitrutont
 
 (b) that tribunal shall inquire into the matter and
 report the facts and findings thereon to the
 President:
 and the President shall act in accordance with the recom-
 mendations of the tribunal.
 (6) Where the question of removing a Judge of the
 Superior Court of Judicature under the provisions of this
 article has been referred to the appropriate tribunal, the
 President.
 (a) in the case of the Chief Justice, may by warrant
 under his hand suspend the Chief Justice from
 performing the functions of his office; and any
 such suspension may at any time be revoked
 by the President, or
 (b) in the case of any other Judge, may, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Judicial
 Council, suspend that Judge from performing
 the functions of his office; and any such sus-
 pension may at any time be revoked by the
 President, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Judicial Council,
 and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal
 recommends to the President that the Judge should not be
 removed.
 (7) A Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature
 may resign from office by writing under his hand addressed,
 (a) in the case of the Chief Justice, to the President:
 and
 (b) in the case of any other Judge, to the Judicial
 Council.
 
 $9
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 SALuFS,    117. (1) The salaries, allowances, gratuities and pension
 etc.      of the Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature shall be
 a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (2) A Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature,
 other than one who retires from public service pursuant to
 the provisions of clause (4) of this article, on retiring from
 office as such Judge,
 (a) shall, in addition to any gratuity payable to
 him, be paid a pension which is equivalent
 to the salary he was entitled to immediately
 before retiring in any case in which any such
 Judge shall have served as such Judge for a
 period of ten years or more; and
 (b) shall not hold any private office of profit
 or emolument either directly or indirectly.
 (3) The salary, allowances and privileges, his rights
 in respect of leave of absence, gratuity or pension and other
 conditions of service of a Judge of the Superior Court of
 Judicature shall not be varied to his disadvantage.
 (4) Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of
 this article a Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature
 may,
 (a) at any time on the completion of twenty
 years' service in the public service at least ten
 continuous years of which are in respect of
 service as such Judge, and
 (b) before attaining the age of sixty years,
 retire from office; and shall be entitled on such retirement
 to a gratuity and pension for the time being applicable to
 the public service.
 JUDICIAL    118. A Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature shall,
 OATH.     before assuming the functions of his office, take and sub-
 scribe before
 (a) the President, in the case of the Chief Justice,
 and
 (b) the Chief Justice, in the case of any other
 such Judge,
 SECOND   the Oath of Allegiance.and the Judicial Oath set out in the
 SCHEDULE.  Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 
 90
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 119. (1) There shall be established a Judicial Council 
 which shall advise the Chief Justice in the performance 
 of his administrative functions and perform such other
 functions as provided by this Constitution or by any other
 law and which shall consist of
 (a) the Chief Justice; and
 (b) the most senior Justice of the Supreme Court,
 the most senior Justice of the Court of Appeal
 and the most senior Justice of the High Court
 of Justice; and
 (c) the Attorney-General, three practising Counsel
 of not less than ten years' standing appointed
 by the Ghana Bar Association, and one other
 person not being Counsel appointed by the
 President.
 (2) The Chief Justice shall, acting in accordance
 with the advice of the Judicial Council, and save as otherwise
 provided in this Constitution, be responsible for the effective
 and efficient administration of the Judiciary.
 120. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the  - -
 power to appoint persons to hold or act in any judicial office " "
 to which this article applies shall vest, subject to the oFFICERS.
 approval of the President, in the Chief Justice acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Judicial Council.
 (2) The provisions of clause (9) of article 102 of this
 Constitution shall apply to a Judge of an inferior Court
 or a Magistrate in the same way as they apply to a Judge
 of the Superior Court of Judicature.
 (3) The Chief Justice may, acting in accordance
 with the advice of the Judicial Council and with the appro-
 val of the President, by constitutional instrument, make
 Regulations for the efficient discharge of the functions of
 the Judicial Service and the Judicial Council under the
 provisions of this article.
 (4) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "judicial office" means
 (a) the office of a Judge of an inferior Court or
 a Magistrate;
 
 91
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) the office of the Judicial Secretary or Registrar
 of the Superior Court of Judicature; and
 (c) such other offices connected with any Court as
 may be prescribed by constitutional instrument made in that behalf by the Chief Justice
 acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Judicial Council and with the approval of
 the President.
 121. (1) There shall be established a Rules of Court Committee which shall consist of
 (a) the Chief Justice who shall be chairman; and
 (b) the other members of the Judicial Council; and
 (c) one practising Counsel of not less than ten
 years' standing and one practising Counsel of
 not more than five years' standing both of
 whom shall be nominated by the Ghana Bar
 Association.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the Rules of Court Committee may, by constitutional instru-
 ment, make Rules of Court for regulating the practice and
 procedure of all Courts in Ghana, which shall include regu-
 lations relating to the prevention of frivolous and vexatious
 proceedings.
 122. (1) The appointment of officers and servants of the
 Courts of Ghana shall, subject to the provisions of article
 120 of this Constitution, be made by the Chief Justice or
 such other Judge or officer of the Court as the Chief Justice
 may direct.
 (2) The Judicial Council shall, acting in consultation
 with the Public Services Commission and with the prior
 approval ofthe President, make Regulationsby constitutional
 instrument prescribing the terms and conditions of service
 of officers and other employees of the Courts established by
 this Constitution or any other law.
 
 92
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 123. Any fees, fines or other moneys taken by the Courts A k
 shall form part of the Consolidated Fund.               E&
 124. (1) Whenever in any proceedings in a Court, other DISCOVERY
 than the Supreme Court, any question arises as to the O  FICIAL
 discovery of an official document and any person or
 authority having custody legal or otherwise of any such
 document refuses, upon request, to produce that document,
 on the ground
 (a) that the document belongs to a class of
 documents which it is prejudicial to the
 security of the State or injurious to the public
 interest to produce, or
 (b) that disclosure of the contents thereof will be
 prejudicial to the security of the State or
 injurious to the public interest,
 the Court shall stay the proceedings and refer the question
 to the Supreme Court for determination.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall have power, pursuant
 to the provisions of the preceding clause,
 (a) to order any person or authority having
 custody legal or otherwise of the document
 to produce it; and any person so ordered
 shall produce the document for the purpose
 of inspection by the Supreme Court; and
 (b) to determine whether or not any such document
 shall be produced in the Court from which
 the reference was made after hearing the
 parties thereto or their legal representatives or
 after having given them the opportunity of
 being heard.
 (3) Where the Supreme Court is of the opinion
 that the document shall be produced it shall make an
 order upon the person or authority having custody of the
 document to produce the same or so much of the contents
 thereof as is essential for the proceedings in accordance
 with the terms of the order.
 
 93
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where the question of the discovery of an
 official document arises in any proceedings in the Supreme
 Court in the circumstances mentioned in clause (1) of
 this article, the Supreme Court shall be governed, mutatis
 mutandis, by the preceding provisions of this article for
 the determination of the question that has arisen.
 SUCCESSION 125. (1) The High Court of Justice established under
 OF COURT. the provisions of clause (4) of article 102 of this Constitu-
 tion, shall be the successor to the High Court of the Supreme
 Court of Judicature in being immediately before the coming
 into force of this Constitution.
 (2) The Court of Appeal established under the
 provisions of clause (4) of article 102 of this Constitution,
 shall be the successor to the Court of Appeal of the Supreme
 Court of Judicature in being immediately before the coming
 into force of this Constitution; and accordingly the Court
 of Appeal as established by this Constitution shall be
 bound to follow the decisions on questions of law binding
 on the Court of Appeal as it existed immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution.
 (3) The Supreme Court shall not be bound to
 follow the decisions of any other Court.
 
 94
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTEiR TEN
 THE LAWS OF GHANA
 126. (1) The laws of Ghana shall comprise         THE LAWS
 (a) this Constitution;                      OF GHANA.
 (b) enactments made by or under the authority
 of the Parliament established by this Constitu-
 tion;
 (c) any Orders, Rules and Regulations made by
 any person or authority pursuant to a power
 conferred in that behalf by this Constitution;
 (d) the existing law; and
 (e) the common law.
 (2) The common law of Ghana shall comprise the
 rules of law generally known as the common law, the rules
 generally known as the doctrines of equity and the rules
 of customary law including those determined by the
 Superior Court of Judicature.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "customary law" means the rules of law which by custom
 are applicable to particular communities in Ghana.
 (4) The existing law shall, save as otherwise provided
 in clause (1) of this article, comprise the written and un-
 written laws of Ghana as they existed immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution, and any Decree
 or statutory instrument issued or made before that date
 which is to come into force on or after that date.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this article, the
 operation of the existing law after the coming into force of
 this Constitution shall not be affected by such commence-
 ment; and accordingly the existing law shall be construed
 with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and
 exceptions as may be necessary to bring it into conformity
 with the provisions of this Constitution, or otherwise to
 give effect to or enable effect to be given to any changes
 effected by this Constitution.
 
 95
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) Any Orders, Rules or Regulations made by any
 person or authority pursuant to a power conferred in that
 behalf by this Constitution or any other law,
 (a) shall be laid before the National Assembly;
 (b) shall be published in the Gazette on the day
 they are so laid before the National Assembly;
 and
 (c) shall come into force at the expiration of a
 period of twenty-one days of being so laid
 unless the National Assembly, before the
 expiration of the said period of twenty-one
 days, annuls any such Orders, Rules or Regu-
 lations by the votes of not less than two-thirds
 of all the members of the National Assembly.
 
 96
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAFTER ELEVEN
 FINANCE
 127. No taxation shall be imposed otherwise than by or TAXATION.
 under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 128. (1) There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which, THE CONSOLI-
 subject to the provisions of this article, shall be paid
 (a) all revenue or other moneys raised or received
 for the purposes of, or on behalf of, the
 Government, and
 (b) any other moneys raised or received in trust
 for or on behalf of the Government.
 (2) The revenues or other moneys referred to in the
 preceding clause shall not include revenues or other moneys
 (a) that are payable by or under an Act of Parlia-
 ment into some other fund established for a
 specific purpose; or
 (b) that may, by or under an Act of Parliament,
 be retained by the department of government
 that received them for the purposes of defray-
 ing the expenses of that department.
 129. (1) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Con- WITHDRAWAL
 FROM THE
 solidated Fund except                                  CONSOLI-
 DATED FUND
 (a) to meet expenditure that is charged upon the OR OTHER
 Fund by this Constitution or by an Act of FUNDS.
 Parliament; or
 (b) where the issue of those moneys has been
 authorised
 (i) by an Appropriation Act; or
 (ii) by a supplementary estimate approved
 by a resolution of the National Assem-
 bly passed in that behalf; or
 
 97
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (iii) by an Act of Parliament enacted pur-
 suant to the provisions of article 131 of
 this Constitution; or
 (iv) by Rules or Regulations made under an
 Act of Parliament in respect of trust
 moneys paid into the Consolidated
 Fund.
 (2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public
 fund, other than the Consolidated Fund and the Contin-
 gency Fund, unless the issue of those moneys has been
 authorised by or under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 AUTHORISA-  130. (1) The Minister for the time being responsible for
 TION OF
 EXPENDITUR. finance shall cause to be prepared and laid before the
 National Assembly in each financial year estimates of the
 revenues and expenditure of Ghana for the next following
 financial year.
 (2) The heads of the expenditure
 (a) of the estimates shall be included in a bill
 to be known as an Appropriation Bill which
 shall be introduced into the National Assembly
 to provide for the issue from the Consolidated
 Fund of the sums of money necessary to meet
 that expenditure and the appropriation of those
 sums for the purposes specified therein; and
 (b) of the Consolidated Fund payments shall be
 laid before the National Assembly for the
 information of the members thereof.
 (3) Where, in respect of any financial year, it is
 found that the amount of moneys appropriated by the
 Appropriation Act for any purpose is insufficient or that
 a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which
 no amount of moneys has been appropriated by that Act,
 a supplementary estimate showing the sum of money
 required shall be laid before the National Assembly.
 
 98
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where, in respect of any financial year, a supple-
 mentary estimate has been approved by the National
 Assembly in accordance with the provisions of clause (3)
 of this article, a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall
 be introduced into the Assembly in the financial year
 next following the financial year to which the estimate
 relates, providing for the appropriation of the sums so
 approved for the purposes specified in that estimate.
 (5) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding
 clauses of this article, the Minister for the time being res-
 ponsible for finance may cause to be prepared and laid
 before the National Assembly estimates of revenue and
 expenditure of Ghana for periods of over one year.
 131. Where it appears to the Minister responsible for AUTHORISA-
 finance that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial TION OF
 EXPENDI-
 year will not come into operation by the beginning of that TURE IN
 financial year, he may, with the prior approval of the ADVANCE OF
 National Assembly signified in that behalf by a resolution AROPR-
 thereof, authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the
 Consolidated Fund for the purposes of meeting expenditure
 necessary to carry on the services of the Government in
 respect of the period expiring three months from the begin-
 ning of the financial year or on the coming into operation
 of the Act whichever is earlier.
 132. (1) There shall be a Contingency Fund into which comm-
 shall be paid moneys voted for that purpose by the National GENCY
 Assembly and from which advances may be authorised FUND,
 by the Committee responsible for financial measures in
 the National Assembly appointed pursuant to the provisions
 of clause (2) of article 81 of this Constitution, whenever
 that Committee is satisfied that there has arisen an urgent
 or unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other
 provision exists to meet that need.
 (2) Where any advance is made from the Contin-
 gency Fund a supplementary estimate shall be presented
 as soon as possible to the National Assembly for the
 purpose of replacing the amount so advanced.
 
 99
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Whenever in the estimates prepared pursuant
 to the provisions of clauses (1) and (3) of article 130 of
 this Constitution provision is made for an item or vote
 other than for the Contingency Fund, not relating to
 any specific item of expenditure, any moneys voted by
 the National Assembly in respect of that item or vote
 shall be under the control and supervision of a committee
 which shall consist of the President, the Prime Minister
 and one other Minister appointed by the Prime Minister.
 LOAN.      133. (1) The National Assembly may, by a resolution
 passed in that behalf and supported by the votes of a
 majority of all the members of the National Assembly,
 authorise the Government to enter into an agreement for
 the granting of a loan out of any public fund or public
 account.
 (2) An agreement entered into pursuant to the
 provisions of the preceding clause shall be laid before
 the National Assembly and shall not come into operation
 unless the same has been approved by a resolution of the
 National Assembly.
 (3) No loan shall be raised by the Government on
 behalf of itself or any other public institution or authority
 otherwise than by or under the authority of an Act of
 Parliament.
 (4) An Act of Parliament enacted pursuant to the
 provisions of the immediately preceding clause shall pro-
 vide
 (a) that the terms and conditions of a loan shall
 be laid before the National Assembly and shall
 not come into operation unless the same has
 been approved by a resolution of the National
 Assembly; and
 
 100
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) that any moneys received in respect of that
 loan shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund
 and form part thereof or into some other public
 fund of Ghana either existing or created for
 the purposes of the loan.
 (5) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "loan" includes any moneys lent or given to or by the
 Government on condition of return or repayment and any
 other form of borrowing or lending in respect of which
 (a) moneys from the Consolidated Fund or any
 other public fund, or
 (b) moneys from any fund by whatever name
 called established for the purposes of payment
 or repayment whether in whole or in part and
 whether directly or indirectly
 may be used for payment or repayment.
 134. (1) The public debt of Ghana shall be a charge PUBIC DEBT.
 upon the Consolidated Fund and other public funds of
 Ghana.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, the public debt
 shall include interest on that debt, sinking fund payments
 and redemption moneys in respect of that debt and the
 costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management
 of that debt.
 The Auditor-General
 135. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General of Ghana THE AUDITOR-
 whose office shall be a public office. GENERAL.
 (2) The public accounts of Ghana and of all public
 offices, including the Courts, the central and local govern-
 ment administrations, of the Universities and public
 institutions of like nature, of any statutory corporation or
 other body or organisation established by an Act of
 Parliament or statutory instrument or otherwise set up out
 of public funds shall be audited and reported on by the
 Auditor-General; and for that purpose the Auditor-General
 or any person authorised or appointed in that behalf by
 
 101
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 the Auditor-General shall have access to all books, records,
 returns and other documents relating or relevant to those
 accounts.
 (3) The public accounts of Ghana and of all other
 persons or authorities referred to in the immediately
 preceding clause shall be kept in such form as the Auditor-
 General shall approve.
 (4) The Auditor-General shall, within twelve months
 of the end of the immediately preceding financial year,
 submit his report to Parliament and shall in that report
 draw attention to irregularities in the accounts audited and
 to any other matter which in his opinion ought to be
 brought to the notice of the National Assembly.
 (5) The National Assembly shall debate the report
 of the Auditor-General and appoint where necessary in
 the public interest a committee to deal with any matters
 arising therefrom.
 (6) In the performance of his functions under this
 Constitution or any other law the Auditor-General
 (a) shall not be subject to the direction or control
 of any other person or authority;
 (b) shall have power to disallow any item of
 expenditure which is contrary to law and to
 surcharge
 (i) the amount of any expenditure dis-
 allowed upon the person responsible
 for incurring or authorising that expen-
 diture; or
 (ii) any sum  which has not been duly
 brought into account upon the person
 by whom the sum ought to have been
 brought into account; or
 (iii) the amount of any loss or deficiency
 upon any person by whose negligence
 or misconduct the loss or deficiency
 has been incurred.
 
 102
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (7) The provisions of paragraph (a) of the imme-
 diately preceding clause shall not preclude the President,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister,
 from requesting the Auditor-General in the public interest
 to audit, at any particular time, the accounts of any body
 or organisation as is referred to in clause (2) of this article.
 (8) Any person aggrieved by a disallowance or sur-
 charge made by the Auditor-General may appeal to the
 High Court of Justice.
 (9) The Rules of Court Committee may, by constitu-
 tional instrument, make Rules of Court for the purposes
 of the immediately preceding clause.
 (10) The salary and allowances payable to the
 Auditor-General shall be a charge upon the Consolidated
 Fund.
 (11) The salary and allowances payable to the
 Auditor-General, his rights in respect of leave of absence,
 retiring award or retiring age shall not be varied to his
 disadvantage after his appointment.
 (12) The provisions of article 116 of this Constitu-
 tion relating to the removal of a Judge of the Superior
 Court of Judicature, other than the Chief Justice, from
 office shall apply to the Auditor-General.
 (13) The Auditor-General shall retire from office
 on attaining the age of sixty years.
 (14) The administrative expenses of the office of
 the Auditor-General including all salaries, allowances,
 gratuities and pensions payable to or in respect of persons
 serving in the Audit Service shall be a charge upon the
 Consolidated Fund.
 (15) The accounts of the office of the Auditor-
 General shall be audited and reported upon by an auditor
 appointed by the National Assembly.
 (16) Every person appointed to be the Auditor-
 General of Ghana shall, before entering upon the duties
 of his office, take and subscribe the Oath of the Auditor-
 General set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution. SECOND
 SCHEDULE.
 103
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 The Audit Service
 THE AUDIT 136. There shall be an Audit Service which shall form
 SERVICE.
 SC  part of the Public Services of Ghana.
 THE AUDIT 137. (1) There shall be an Audit Service Board which
 SERVICE
 BOARD,   shall consist of a chairman and four other members
 all of whom shall be appointed by the President, acting
 in consultation with the Council of State: the Auditor-
 General and the Head of the Civil Service or his represen-
 tative shall be ex officio members of the Audit Service
 Board.
 (2) The appointment of officers and other employees
 in the Audit Service, other than the Auditor-General,
 shall be made, with the approval of the President, by the
 Audit Service Board, acting in consultation with the Public
 Services Commission.
 (3) The President may, subject to such conditions
 as he may think fit, delegate, by directions in writing, his
 power of approval under the provisions of the immediately
 preceding clause to the Public Services Commission or the
 Audit Service Board or to any committee thereof, to any
 member of either the Public Services Commission or the
 Audit Service Board or to any public officer.
 (4) The Audit Service Board shall, acting in consul-
 tation with the Public Services Commission, and with
 the prior approval of the President, make Regulations
 by constitutional instrument prescribing the terms and
 conditions of service of officers and other employees in
 the Audit Service and generally for the effective and efficient
 administration of the Audit Service.
 (5) A member of the Audit Service Board, other
 than an ex officio member, may be removed from office
 by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Council of State, for inability to perform the functions of
 his office whether arising from infirmity of mind or body
 or for any other sufficient cause.
 
 104
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWELVE
 THE PUBLIC SERVICES COMMISSION
 138. No member of the public services shall be     PROTECTION
 FOR THE
 (a) victimised or discriminated against for having PUBLIC
 discharged his duties faithfully in accordance SERVICES.
 with this Constitution and without regard to
 party considerations;
 (b) dismissed or removed from office or reduced
 in rank or otherwise punished without just
 cause.
 139. (1) There shall be a Public Services Commission THE PUBLIC
 which shall perform such functions as are assigned to it by SERV  ON
 this Constitution or any other law and which shall consist
 of a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman and such other
 members as Parliament may, subject to the provisions of
 paragraph (b) of article 48 of this Constitution, by law
 prescribe.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
 as a member of the Public Services Commission
 (a) if he is a member of a Local or District Council
 or a Regional Council; or
 (b) if he is a public officer; or
 (c) if he is not qualified to be elected a member of
 the National Assembly; or
 (d) if he is otherwise disqualified from holding any
 public office.
 (3) A member of the National Assembly or a
 person holding other public office, other than a Chief,
 appointed a member of the Public Services Commission
 shall resign from the National Assembly or that other
 public office.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of the next succeeding
 clause, the terms of service of a Justice of the Court of
 Appeal shall apply to the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman
 of the Public Services Commission.
 
 105
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) The provisions of article 116 of this Constitution
 relating to the removal of a Judge of the Superior Court
 of Judicature, other than the Chief Justice, shall apply,
 (a) to the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of
 the Public Services Commission who shall retire
 at the age of sixty-five years; and
 (b) to the other members of the Public Services
 Commission before the expiration of their
 period of service as provided by Parliament.
 (6) Whenever the office of the Chairman of the
 Public Services Commission is vacant or if the person
 holding that office is for any reason unable to perform
 the functions of that office, the functions of that office
 shall be performed by the Vice-Chairman and in the absence
 of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman by any other
 member of the Public Services Commission designated in
 that behalf by the President.
 APPOrNT-    140. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 OF"; eLC  the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in any
 oFFICERS.  office in the Public Services, shall vest in the President,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Services
 Commission.
 (2) The President may, subject to such conditions
 as he may think fit, delegate some of his functions under
 this article by directions in writing to the Public Services
 Commission or to a committee thereof or to any member
 of the Commission or to any pubic officer.
 (3) No person shall be appointed under the provi-
 sions of this article to any office on the personal or house-
 hold staff of the President save with the consent of the
 President.
 (4) Before the Public Services Commission appoints
 to any public office any person holding or acting in any
 office the power to make appointment to which is not
 vested in the Public Services Commission, it shall consult
 the person or authority in whom that power is vested.
 
 106
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) The Public Services Commission shall, upon
 request made to it by any person or authority having
 power to make an appointment to an office under this
 Constitution or in any other public institution, make
 recommendations to that person or authority for the
 appointment of any public officer or any other person
 to any office the power to make appointment to which is
 vested by this Constitution in that person, authority or
 public institution.
 (6) The Public Services Commission may, with the
 prior approval of the President, make Regulations by
 constitutional instrument for the effective and efficient per-
 formance of its functions under this Constitution or any
 other law.
 (7) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
 the Public Services Commission shall not be subject to the
 control or direction of any other person or authority in
 the performance of its functions under this Constitution or
 any other law.
 141. (1) It shall be the duty of the Public Services Com-
 * * FUNGTONS
 mission                                               OF TH
 PUBLIC
 (a) to conduct or cause to be conducted on its SERVICES
 behalf examinations for appointments to any "urssIoN.
 office in the Public Services including service
 with a public corporation where any such
 examinations are prescribed by Regulations
 made in that behalf;
 (b) to assist in framing and operating schemes of
 joint recruitment to offices in the Public
 Services and public corporations for which
 candidates possessing special qualifications are
 required, including schemes for the standardi-
 sation of salaries and other conditions of
 service in the Public Services and public
 corporations;
 
 107
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) to prescribe the methods of recruitment to
 offices in the Public Services and public cor-
 porations in consultation with the appropriate
 authority responsible for appointment to such
 offices; and
 (d) to prescribe the principles to be followed in
 making appointments to posts in the Public
 Services and public corporations and in making
 promotions and transfers from one Service to
 another and on the suitability of candidates
 for such appointments, promotions or transfers
 in consultation with the appropriate authority
 responsible for the Public Service or public
 corporation concerned.
 (2) For the purposes of this article the expression
 "public corporation" means a statutory corporation set
 up entirely out of public funds or funds provided by Par-
 liament.
 
 108
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN
 THE POLICE SERVICE
 142. There shall be a Police Service which shall form THE POLICE
 part of the Public Services of Ghana.                   SERVICE.
 143. (1) There shall be a Police Council which shall THE POLICE
 consist of                                              COUNCIL.
 (a) a member of the Public Services Commission
 who shall be Chairman;
 (b) the Head of the Police Service;
 (c) a representative of the Attorney-General;
 (d) the official head (Principal Secretary) of the
 Ministry responsible for internal affairs;
 (e) a representative of the Ghana Bar Association;
 and
 (f) not more than three other members, one of
 whom shall be a person who shall have held
 office as a senior Police Officer, as the President
 may, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Prime Minister, appoint.
 (2) The Head of the Police Service shall be appointed
 by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Prime Minister.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in any office
 in the Police Service shall vest in the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Police Council.
 (4) The President may, subject to such conditions
 as he thinks fit, delegate some of his functions under this
 article by directions in writing to the Police Council or to
 any committee thereof or to any member thereof.
 
 109
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 REGIONAL    144. (1) There shall be established for each Region a
 POUCE
 cowarES. Regional Police Committee which shall consist of
 (a) the Regional Chief Executive;
 (b) the two most senior officers of the Police
 Service in the Region;
 (c) a representative of each of the administrative
 districts in the Region appointed by the Local
 Councils in each such district; and
 (d) a representative of the Ghana Bar Association.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Regional Police Com-
 mittee to advise the Police Council on any matter relating
 to the administration of the Police Service in the Region
 and generally supervise the conduct of the Police Service
 in the Region.
 wADRA-,     145. Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament
 nowCE may, by an Act of Parliament, provide for the effective and
 SERVICE.  efficient administration of the Police Service and other
 matters connected therewith.
 
 110
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 THE PRISONS SERVICE
 146. There shall be a Prisons Service which shall form THE PRISONS
 part of the Public Services of Ghana.                   SERVICE.
 147. (1) There shall be a Prisons Service Board which     E PRISONS
 shall consist of                                        BOARD.
 (a) a member of the Public Services Commission,
 who shall be chairman;
 (b) the Head of the Prisons Service;
 (c) a medical officer nominated by the professional
 organisation recognised by the President as
 representing the interests of the medical
 profession in Ghana;
 (d) a representative of the Attorney-General;
 (e) the official head (Principal Secretary) of the
 Ministry or Department of State responsible
 for social welfare; and
 (f) a legal practitioner, a woman and two other
 members one of whom at least shall be a
 representative of religious organisations as
 the President may, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint.
 (2) The Head of the Prisons Service shall be appoin-
 ted by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Prime Minister.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in any office
 in the Prisons Service shall vest in the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Prisons Service Board.
 (4) The President may, subject to such conditions as
 he thinks fit, delegate some of his functions under this
 article by directions in writing to the Prisons Service Board
 or to any committee thereof or to any member thereof.
 
 111
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 AM    R-    148. (1) The Prisons Service Board shall, acting in
 PaRIsoNs consultation with the Public Services Commission, and
 SERVICE.  with the prior approval of the President, make Regulations
 by constitutional instrument prescribing the terms and con-
 ditions of service of officers and other employees in the
 Prisons Service and generally for the effective and efficient
 administration of the Prisons Service.
 (2) Regulations made pursuant to the provisions
 of the preceding clause shall contain provisions relating to,
 (a) the review of the conditions of prisoners and
 all other persons in legal custody at intervals
 of not less than two years;
 (b) the making of reports of unjustified treatment
 of, and cruelty to, prisoners and persons in
 legal custody and the manner in which such
 reports shall be dealt with; and
 (c) such measures, generally, as will ensure the
 welfare of prisoners and other persons in
 legal custody.
 
 112
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FIFTEEN
 THE ARMED FORCES OF GHANA
 149. No person shall raise any armed force save by or sLmo or
 under the authority of an Act of Parliament.           ^RE.
 150. There shall be an Armed Forces Council which shall FOmE
 consist of                                             couNC1L.
 (a) the Prime Minister, who shall be chairman;
 (b) the Minister of Defence;
 (c) the Chief of Defence Staff;
 (d) the Minister for Interior; and
 (e) two other persons as the President shall, act-
 ing in accordance with the advice of the Prime
 Minister, appoint.
 151. (1) The Chief of Defence Staff of the Armed Forces APPOINT-
 shall be appointed by the President acting in accordance oI  FAN
 with the advice of the Council of State.              TIONS OF 1
 ARMED
 (2) The Chief of Defence Staff of the Armed Forces .cONCL.
 shall, subject to the provisions of this article and to the
 control or direction of the Armed Forces Council, be
 responsible for the operational control and the administra-
 tion of the Armed Forces as a whole.
 (3) The President may, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Armed Forces Council, appoint officers of
 the Armed Forces who shall be given such command as the
 Armed Forces Council shall determine.
 (4) The President shall, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Armed Forces Council, grant commissions
 to officers of the Armed Forces.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of the immediately
 preceding clause, the power to appoint persons to hold or to
 act in any office in the Armed Forces shall vest in the
 President, acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Armed Forces Council.
 
 113
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) The Armed Forces Council may, subject to
 such conditions as it may think fit, delegate some of its
 functions under this article by directions in writing to a
 committee thereof or to any member of the Council.
 FUNMoNS    152. (1) The Armed Forces Council shall advise the
 OF THE   Cabinet on all major matters of policy relating to defence
 ARMED
 FORCES   and strategy including the role of the Armed Forces,
 COUNCIL.  military budgeting and finance, administration and the
 promotion of officers above the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel
 or its equivalent.
 (2) The Armed Forces Council may, with the prior
 approval of the President, by constitutional instrument
 make Regulations for the performance of its functions
 under this Constitution or any other law, and for the
 effective and efficient administration of the Armed Forces.
 (3) Regulations made pursuant to the provisions
 of the immediately preceding clause shall include regula-
 tions in respect of
 (a) the control and administration of the Army,
 the Navy and the Air Force of Ghana;
 (b) the ranks of officers and men of each Armed
 Force, the members in each such rank and
 the use of uniforms by such men;
 (c) the conditions of service, including conditions
 of service relating to the enrolment and to the
 pay, pensions, gratuities and other allowances
 of officers and men of each Armed Force and
 deductions therefrom;
 (d) the authority and powers of command of
 officers and men of each Armed Force; and
 (e) the delegation to other persons of powers of
 commanding officers to try accused persons
 and the conditions subject to which delega-
 tions may be made.
 
 114
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN
 CHIEFTAINCY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
 153. The institution of chieftaincy together with its INSTTrToN
 OF CHIEP-
 Traditional Councils as established by customary law and TAINCY.
 usage is hereby guaranteed.
 154. (1) There shall be established a National House of NATIONAL
 HOUSE OF
 Chiefs.                                               cmEFS.
 (2) The House of Chiefs of each Region shall elect
 as members of the National House of Chiefs five chiefs
 from the Region.
 (3) The National House of Chiefs shall, subject
 to the provisions of clause (3) of article 105 of this
 Constitution
 (a) have appellate jurisdiction in any matter
 relating to chieftaincy which has been deter-
 mined by the House of Chiefs in a Region from
 which appellate jurisdiction there shall be an
 appeal, with the leave of the Supreme Court
 or of the National House of Chiefs to the
 Supreme Court; and
 (b) advise any person or authority charged with
 any responsibility under this Constitution or
 any other law for any matter relating to or
 affecting chieftaincy.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) of article
 126 of this Constitution, the National House of Chiefs
 (a) shall undertake the progressive study, inter-
 pretation and codification of customary law
 with a view to evolving, in appropriate cases,
 a unified system of rules of customary law;
 and
 
 115
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) shall perform such other functions, not being
 inconsistent with any function performable
 by the House of Chiefs of a Region, as Parlia-
 ment may, by or under an Act of Parliament,
 confer on it or otherwise refer to it.
 KEGIONAL    155. (1) There shall be established in and for each Region
 HOEF o    a House of Chiefs which shall
 (a) have original jurisdiction in all matters relating
 to a paramount Stool or the occupant of a
 paramount Stool;
 (b) hear and determine, subject to the provisions
 of clause (3) of article 105 of this Constitution,
 appeals from the highest Traditional Councils
 within the area of authority of the Traditional
 Authority within which they are established,
 in respect of the nomination, election, instal-
 lation or deposition of any person as a chief;
 (c) perform in and for the Region such other
 functions as may be conferred upon it by or
 under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the House of Chiefs of a Region existing immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be
 deemed to have been established, from the coming into
 force of this Constitution as the House of Chiefs of the
 Region.
 LOCAL       156. (1) For the purposes of local government there
 GOVERNMENT shall be established Local Councils, District Councils and
 COUNCIL&  Regional Councils.
 (2) The area of authority of a Council established
 pursuant to the provisions of the preceding clause shall be
 as determined by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parlia-
 ment may, by or under an Act of Parliament, establish
 rural, urban, municipal or other local government councils
 or area committees.
 
 116
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 157. (1) A Local Council shall consist of elected and LOCAL
 traditional members.
 (2) The number of traditional members of a Local
 Council shall not at any time exceed one-half of the number
 of elected members.
 (3) A Local Council shall perform such functions
 as Parliament may by law prescribe.
 158. (1) A District Council shall consist of such number IsIuCT
 of members as Parliament may by or under an Act of couNCs.
 Parliament prescribe,
 (a) two-thirds of whom shall be elected in accor-
 dance with Regulations made in that behalf
 by the Electoral Commission pursuant to the
 provisions of clause (1) of article 31 of this
 Constitution; and
 (b) one-third of whom shall be chosen by the
 Traditional Authorities in the District in accor-
 dance with traditional and customary usage.
 (2) A District Council shall be responsible for
 the administration of its area of authority and shall perform
 such other functions as Parliament may by law prescribe.
 (3) A District Council may, subject to control by
 Parliament, levy such rates. and taxes within its area of
 authority as may be approved by a resolution passed in
 that behalf by the Council and supported by the votes
 of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the District
 Council.
 (4) Nothing contained in this article shall be
 deemed to affect the allegiance owed under customary law
 and usage by any traditional authority or by any com-
 munity immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution to any other traditional authority.
 159. (1) There shall be a Regional Council in each REmN
 Region which shall consist, subject to the provisions of
 clause (2) of this article, of
 (a) at least as many members as there are District
 Councils in the Region;
 
 117
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) not more than two chiefs from the House of
 Chiefs of the Region; and
 (c) the regional heads of the Ministries in the
 Region as ex officio members who shall not
 have the right to vote on any matter for
 decision before the Regional Council.
 (2) The number of the ex officio members of a
 Regional Council shall not at any time exceed one-half of
 the total number of the members of the Council.
 (3) The chairman of the Regional Council shall be
 appointed by the Prime Minister; and any person so
 appointed and not being a public officer at the time of his
 appointment shall be a public officer.
 (4) Each District Council shall elect at least one
 member to the Regional Council from among members
 of the District Councils and from among persons who are
 qualified to be elected as members of the District Council.
 (5) The functions of a Regional Council shall include
 (a) the co-ordination and supervision of the
 development plans, programmes or other func-
 tions of the District Councils in the Region;
 (b) planning at the regional level, and the integra-
 tion of departmental programmes in the
 Region; and
 (c) such functions of the Government as are
 performable at the regional level.
 (6) A Regional Council shall have such administra-
 tive autonomy as is commensurate with the performance of
 its functions under this Constitution or any other law and
 with the subordination of those functions to the overall
 national needs.
 LOA       160. (1) There shall be established a Local Government
 mav"Num Grants Commission to which the Government shall make
 INANCB. available grants-in-aid to be allocated to Regional Councils
 and local government councils established by or under this
 Constitution.
 
 118
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Local Government
 Grants Commission
 (a) to determine the proportion of grants to be
 allocated to Regional Councils and the local
 government councils established by this Con-
 stitution; and
 (b) to review such grants at intervals of not more
 than five years.
 (3) The Local Government Grants Commission
 shall consist of
 (a) one representative of each Regional Council;
 (b) one representative of the Ministry responsible
 for finance;
 (c) one representative of the Ministry responsible
 for local government;
 (d) one representative of the Ministry responsible
 for planning; and
 (e) two other members appointed by the Prime
 Minister.
 (4) The President shall, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Prime Minister, designate one member
 of the Commission as chairman of the Commission.
 161. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, LOCAL
 Parliament may by or under an Act of Parliament provide MNSu
 for the performance of functions by the Councils established etc.
 under this Chapter.
 
 119
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
 LANDS
 Public Lands
 PUBLIC     162. (1) All public lands in Ghana shall be vested in the
 OTHER    President on behalf of, and in trust for, the people of Ghana.
 PUBLIC
 PROPERTY.      (2) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "public lands" includes any land which, immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution, was
 vested in the National Liberation Council in trust for, and
 on behalf of, the people of Ghana for the Public Service of
 Ghana, and any other land acquired in the public interest
 or for the purposes of the Government of Ghana before,
 on or after that date.
 Lands Commission
 THE LANDS. 163. (1) There shall be a Lands Commission which shall
 COMMISSION. consist of a chairman and not less than five other members.
 (2) The President shall, acting in consultation -with
 the Council of State, appoint the Chairman and two
 members of the Commission and the other members shall
 be appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Prime Minister.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
 as a member of the Lands Commission unless he is qualified,
 at least, to be elected as a member of the National Assembly.
 (4) The office of a member of the Lands Commis-
 sion shall become vacant
 (a) at the expiration of four years after his appoint-
 ment; or
 (b) if any circumstances arise that would cause
 him to be disqualified for appointment under
 the provisions of the immediately preceding
 clause; or
 
 120
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) if a member is removed from office by the
 President for inability to perform the functions
 of his office or for any other sufficient cause or
 for stated misbehaviour.
 (5) The Lands Commission shall hold and manage,
 to the exclusion of any other person or authority, any land
 or minerals vested in the President by this Constitution or
 any other law, or vested in the Commission by any law, or
 acquired by the Government, and shall have such other
 functions in relation thereto as may be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament.
 (6) The provisions of clause (5) of this article shall
 be without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution
 and any other law relating to the compulsory acquisition or
 taking possession of any land, or mines, minerals, forests or
 national parks or reserves, or the tenure, use or management
 of land.
 (7) No interest in or right over any land in Ghana
 shall be created which vests in any person who is not a
 citizen of Ghana a freehold interest in any land in Ghana;
 and accordingly any agreement, deed or conveyance of
 whatever nature which seeks to confer any such interest in
 or right over any such land on any person who is not a
 citizen of Ghana shall be void and of no effect.
 (8) Where, on the coming into force of this Consti-
 tution, any person not being a citizen of Ghana has a
 freehold interest in or right over any land in Ghana, that
 interest or right shall be deemed to be a leasehold interest
 for a period of fifty years at a peppercorn rent from such
 commencement, and the reversionary interest in any such
 land shall vest in the President in trust for and on behalf of
 the people of Ghana.
 (9) No interest in or right over any land in Ghana
 shall be created which vests in any person who is not a
 citizen of Ghana a leasehold estate for a term of more than
 fifty years at any one time.
 
 121
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (10) Where, on the coming into force of this
 Constitution, any person not being a citizen of Ghana has a
 leasehold interest in or right over any land in Ghana for an
 unexpired period of more than fifty years, that interest in
 or right over any such land shall be deemed to be an interest
 in or right subsisting for a period of fifty years from such
 commencement.
 Stool Lands
 STOOL AND   164. (1) All stool lands in Ghana shall vest in the
 SKIN LANDS
 AND OTHER  appropriate Stool on behalf of, and in trust for, the subjects
 PROPERTY.  of the Stool.
 (2) There shall be established for each Stool or
 Skin a Stool Lands Account into which shall be paid all
 rents, dues, royalties, revenues or other payments whether
 in the nature of income or capital from any such stool land.
 (3) An assurance of stool land to any person shall
 not operate to pass any interest in or right over any stool
 land unless the same shall have been executed with the
 consent and concurrence of the Lands Commission; and
 where the Commission fails or refuses to give any such
 consent and concurrence any person aggrieved by such
 failure or refusal may appeal to the High Court of Justice.
 (4) There shall be paid, out of the Stool Lands
 Account,
 (a) to the Stool through the traditional authority
 for the maintenance of the Stool in keeping
 with its status,
 (b) to the traditional authority, and
 (c) to the Local and District Councils established
 pursuant to the provisions of article 156 of
 this Constitution,
 within whose area of authority are situate the stool land
 concerned such moneys and in such proportions as may be
 determined by the Regional Council of the Region.
 
 122
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) Where any such Stool, traditional authority,
 Local Council or District Council is dissatisfied with the
 apportionment determined by the Regional Council it may
 appeal to the Lands Ccmmission which shall determine
 the issue taking into consideration the relative needs of the
 Stool, traditional authority or the Councils concerned.
 
 123
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
 COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY
 owrr-     165. (1) Save as otherwise provided in clause (2) of
 Corn  article 4 of this Constitution, the President shall, by constitu-
 OFLNQUIRY. tional instrument, appoint a Commission of Inquiry into
 any matter of public interest where
 (a) the Prime Minister advises that it is in the
 public interest so to do; or
 (b) the National Assembly by a resolution passed
 in that behalf require that a Commission be
 appointed to inquire into any matter specified
 in the resolution being a matter of public
 importance.
 (2) A Commission appointed pursuant to the
 provisions of the preceding clause may consist of a sole
 Commissioner or two or more persons one of whom shall
 be appointed the chairman of the Commission.
 (3) No person shall be appointed a sole Commis-
 sioner or the chairman of a Commission of Inquiry pursuant
 to the provisions of this article unless
 (a) he is a Judge of the Superior Court of Judi-
 cature; or
 (b) he is a person qualified to be appointed a
 Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature; or
 (c) he is a person who has held office as a Judge
 of the Superior Court of Judicature; or
 (d) he is a person who possesses special qualifi-
 cations in respect of the matter forming the
 subject matter of the investigation.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of the immediately
 preceding clause, where a Commission of Inquiry appointed
 pursuant to the provisions of clause (1) of this article
 consists of more than two Commissioners, other than the
 Chairman, each of the persons forming the majority of
 such Commissioners shall be such a person as is referred
 to in paragraph (a) or (b) or (c) or (d) of clause (3) of this article.
 124
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 166. (1) A Commission of Inquiry shall have such POWERS OF
 * COMMISSION
 powers, rights and privileges as are vested in the High OFNQUIY.
 Court of Justice or a Judge thereof at a trial in respect of
 (a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and
 examining them on oath, affirmation or other-
 wise; and
 (b) compelling the production of documents; and
 (c) the issue of a commission or request to examine
 witnesses abroad.
 (2) A sole Commissioner or a member of a Com-
 mission of Inquiry shall not be liable to any action or suit
 in respect of any matter or thing done by him in the per-
 formance of his functions as such Commissioner or member.
 167. It shall be the duty of a Commission of Inquiry  ruNmImoNs
 (a) to make a full, faithful and an impartial SION OF
 inquiry into any matter specified in the com- IQURY.
 mission of appointment; and
 (b) to report in writing the result of the inquiry;
 and
 (c) to furnish in the report the reasons leading to
 the conclusions arrived at or reported.
 168. (1) Save as may be otherwise ordered by the Com- RULES OF
 mission in the interest of public morality, public safety or EVIDENCE.
 public order the proceedings of every Commission of
 Inquiry shall be held in public.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the
 Rules of Court Committee established pursuant to the provi-
 sions of article 121 of this Constitution shall, by consti-
 tutional instrument, make Rules regulating the practice and
 procedure of all Commissions of Inquiry.
 
 125
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER NINETEEN
 AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
 AMENDMENTS 169. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parlia-
 CONSTrU-  ment may, by an Act of Parliament, amend any provision
 TION.     of this Constitution.
 (2) No provision of this Constitution shall be amended
 or deemed to have been amended or altered whether
 directly or indirectly by an Act of Parliament unless that
 Act of Parliament shall have been enacted in accordance
 with the relevant provisions of this article.
 (3) Parliament shall have no power to amend this
 clause, the preceding clauses of this article, any provision
 of Chapter One, and articles 127, 149 and 153 of this Consti-
 tution.
 (4) Parliament shall have no power to amend this
 clause or any provision of
 (a) clauses (5) to (9) inclusive of this article,
 (b) Chapter Four, which deals with the Liberty of
 the Individual,
 (c) Chapter Five, which deals with Representation
 of the People, and
 (d) clauses (1), (2) and (3) of article 102, clauses
 (1), (2) and (6) of article 115, clauses (3), (4)
 and (5) of article 116 and article 117, other
 than clause (2) thereof,
 of this Constitution, in any way that may detract or
 derogate from any such provision or the principles embo-
 died in any such provision.
 (5) A bill for an Act of Parliament to amend a provi-
 sion of this Constitution pursuant to the provisions of
 
 126
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 clause (4) of this article shall not be passed in the National
 Assembly unless
 (a) the proposal for the bill shall have been debated
 in the National Assembly and accepted by a
 resolution passed in that behalf by the National
 Assembly; and
 (b) the proposal and the bill for the amendment
 shall have been published in the Gazette by
 the Speaker for a period of not less than six
 months immediately preceding the introduction
 of the bill in the National Assembly; and
 (c) the bill which seeks to effect the amendment
 contained in the proposal shall have been
 supported at the end of the final debate, on
 a secret ballot, by the votes of not less than
 two-thirds of all the members of the National
 Assembly.
 (6) A bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any of
 the following provisions of this Constitution, that is to say,
 articles 5 and 6, article 9, clause (3) of article 10, articles
 36 to 56 inclusive, clause (2) of article 59, articles 60 to
 77 inclusive, articles 84 and 85 inclusive, articles 87 to 99
 inclusive, articles 128 to 141 inclusive, clauses (1) and (2)
 of article 151, clause (1) of article 156, clauses (1) and (2)
 of article 157, clauses (1) and (2) of article 158, articles
 159 and 160, article 164 and articles 170 to 174 inclusive
 shall not be passed in the National Assembly, unless
 (a) the proposal for the bill has been debated in
 the National Assembly and accepted by a
 resolution passed in that behalf by the National
 Assembly; and
 (b) the proposal and the bill for the amendment
 shall have been published in the Gazette by the
 Speaker for a period of not less than twelve
 months immediately preceding the introduction
 of the bill in the National Assembly; and
 
 127
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) the bill which seeks to effect the amendment
 contained in the proposal shall have been
 approved by a resolution of the National
 Assembly passed in that behalf and supported,
 at the end of the second and final debates, on
 a secret ballot, by the votes of not less than
 two-thirds of all the members of the National
 Assembly during the life of that Assembly; and
 (d) the bill has been approved after the dissolution
 of the National Assembly referred to in the
 immediately preceding paragraph by a resolu-
 tion passed in that behalf and supported by the
 votes of not less than two-thirds of all the
 members of the National Assembly which
 meets after the said dissolution.
 (7) A bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any
 provision of this Constitution, other than such a provision
 as is referred to in clauses (3), (4) and (6) of this article. shall
 not be passed in the National Assembly unless it is suppor-
 ted at the end of the second and final debates, on a secret
 ballot, by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the
 members of the National Assembly.
 (8) Subject to the preceding provisions of this article,
 Parliament shall have no power to amend any provision of
 this Constitution in any manner which is, by itself or in its
 effect, against the spirit of this Constitution.
 (9) Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (6) to
 (12) of article 84 of this Constitution, the President shall
 not assent to a bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any
 provision of this Constitution unless
 (a) the bill is expressed to be a bill for an Act to
 amend the Constitution and only the Consti-
 tution; and
 (b) the bill is accompanied by a certificate signed
 by the Speaker of the National Assernbly
 stating that the relevant provisions of this
 article and of clause (3) of article 82 of this
 Constitution have been complied with.
 
 128
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY
 MISCELLANEOUS
 170. (1) Where any person has any claim against the cLAis
 Government that claim may be enforced as of right by GANMT
 proceedings taken against the Government for that purpose
 without the grant of a fiat or the use of the process known
 as petition of right.
 (2) The Government shall be subject to all those
 liabilities in tort to which, if it were a private person of full
 age and capacity, it would be subject
 (a) in respect of torts committed by its employees
 or agents; and
 (b) in respect of any breach of those duties which
 a person owes to his employees or agents at
 common law or under any other law by reason
 of being their employer; and
 (c) in respect of any breach of the duties attaching
 at common law or under any other law to the
 ownership, occupation, possession or control
 of property.
 (3) No proceedings shall lie against the Govern-
 ment by virtue of the provisions of paragraph (a) of the
 immediately preceding clause in respect of any act or
 omission of an employee or agent of the Government
 unless the act or omission would, apart from the provisions
 of this article, have given rise to a cause of action in tort
 against that employee or agent or his estate.
 (4) Where the Government is bound by a statutory
 duty which is binding also upon persons other than the
 Government and its officers, then the Government shall, in
 respect of a failure to comply with that duty, be subject to
 all those liabilities in tort to which it would be so subject
 if the Government were a private person of full age and
 capacity.
 (5) Where any functions are conferred or imposed
 upon an officer of the Government as such either by any
 
 129
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 rule of the common law or by statute and that officer
 commits a tort while performing or purporting to perform
 those functions, the liabilities of the Government in respect
 of the tort shall be such as they would have been if those
 functions had been conferred or imposed solely by virtue
 of instructions lawfully given by the Government.
 (6) No proceedings shall lie against the Govern-
 ment by virtue of the provisions of this article in respect of
 (a) anything done or omitted to be done by any
 person while discharging or purporting to
 discharge any responsibilities of a judicial
 nature vested in him; or
 (b) any act, neglect or default of any officer of the
 Government unless that officer
 (i) has been directly or indirectly appointed
 by the Government and was, at the
 material time, paid in respect of his
 duties as officer of the Government
 wholly out of public funds or moneys
 provided by Parliament, or
 (ii) was, at the material time, holding an
 office in respect of which the Public
 Services Commission certifies that the
 holder thereof would normally be so
 paid.
 (7) Where the Government is subject to any liability
 by virtue of the provisions of this article, the law relating to
 indemnity and contribution shall be enforceable
 (a) against the Government by an employee thereof
 acting in the proper execution of his duties in
 respect of the liability to which he is so subject
 or by any other person in respect of the liability
 to which it is so subject,
 (b) by the Government against any person, other
 than an employee of the Government, in
 respect of the liability to which it is so subject,
 as if the Government were a private person of full age and
 capacity.
 
 130
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 171. (1) For the purposes of enforcing any provisions LEGAL AID,
 of this Constitution, a person shall have legal aid in con-
 nection with any proceedings relating thereto if he has
 reasonable grounds for taking, defending, prosecuting or
 being a party thereto.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parlia-
 ment shall by or under an Act of Parliament prescribe
 (a) the conditions of legal aid;
 (b) the assessment of disposable capital or income
 or property for the purposes of contributions
 towards legal aid;
 (c) the right to and the nature of legal advice;
 (d) the composition and functions of advisory
 committees; and
 (e) generally for the purposes of giving effect to
 the provisions of this article.
 (3) In addition to the preceding provisions of this
 article, Parliament may, by or under an Act of Parliament,
 provide for the granting of legal aid in such matters, other
 than those referred to in clause (1) of this article, as may be
 prescribed therein.
 (4) For the purposes of this article, legal aid shall
 consist of representation by a legal practitioner, including
 all such assistance as is given by a legal practitioner in
 the steps preliminary or incidental to any proceedings or
 arriving at or giving effect to a compromise to avoid or to
 bring an end to any proceedings.
 172. (1) In this Constitution unless the context otherwise INTERPRETA-
 requires,
 "Act of Parliament" means an Act enacted by
 Parliament;
 "Armed Forces of Ghana" means the Ghana
 defence forces for which provision is made
 by Parliament;
 "article" means an article of this Constitution;
 "Civil Service" includes service in both central
 and local governments;
 
 131
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 "constitutional instrument" means an instrument
 made pursuant to a power conferred in that
 behalf by this Constitution;
 "Counsel" includes a solicitor;
 "Court" means a Court of competent jurisdiction
 established by or under the authority of this
 Constitution;
 "Decree" includes a Decree made by the National
 Liberation Council or under its authority
 and any statutory instrument made under the
 authority of any such Decree;
 ''enactment" means an Act of Parliament or a
 constitutional instrument or a statutory
 instrument or any provision of an Act of
 Parliament or a constitutional or a statutory
 instrument;
 "functions" includes powers and duties;
 "Government" means any authority by which the
 executive authority of Ghana is duly exercised;
 "judgment" includes an order or decree of the
 Court;
 "Minister" includes the Prime Minister and a
 Minister appointed pursuant to the provi-
 sions of article 61 of this Constitution;
 "oath" includes an affirmation;
 "Oath of Allegiance" means the oath of allegiance
 SECOND               specified in the Second Schedule to this
 SCHEDULE.            Constitution;
 "Paramount Chief" means a person who has been
 nominated, elected and installed as such
 in accordance with customary law and usage;
 
 132
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 "public service" includes service in any civil
 capacity of the Government, the emoluments
 attaching to which are paid directly from
 the Consolidated Fund or directly out of
 moneys provided by Parliament and service
 with any statutory corporation established
 entirely out of public funds or moneys
 provided by Parliament;
 "retiring awards" includes pension and gratuity;
 "Rules of Court Committee" means the Rules
 of Court Committee established by the pro-
 visions of article 121 of this Constitution;
 "session"  means the sitting of the National
 Assembly beginning when it meets after a
 prorogation or dissolution of the National
 Assembly at any time and ending when the
 National Assembly is prorogued or is dis-
 solved without having been prorogued;
 "sitting" includes a period during which the
 National Assembly is sitting continuously
 without adjournment and a period during
 which it is in committee;
 "statutory instrument" means an instrument made,
 whether directly or indirectly, under a power
 conferred by an Act of Parliament;
 "stool land" includes any land or interest in, or
 right over, any land controlled by a Stool
 or Skin, the head of a particular community
 or the captain of a company, for the benefit
 
 133
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 of the subjects of that Stool or the members
 of that community or company; and "Stool"
 includes a Skin and the person or body of
 persons having control over stool land.
 (2) In this Constitution and in any other law,
 (a) a reference to the holder of an office by the
 term designating his office, unless the context
 otherwise requires, shall be construed as
 including a reference to any person for the
 time being lawfully acting in, or performing
 the functions of, that office;
 (b) references to the power to remove a public
 officer from his office shall be construed as
 including references to any power conferred by
 any law to require or permit that officer to
 retire from the public service:
 Provided that,
 (i) nothing in this paragraph   shall be
 construed as conferring on any person
 or authority power to require a Judge
 of the Superior Court of Judicature,
 or the Auditor-General to retire from
 the Public Services; and
 (ii) any power conferred by any law to
 permit a person to retire from the
 Public Services shall, in the case of any
 public officer who may be removed
 from office by some person or authority,
 other than a Commission established
 by this Constitution, vest in the Presi-
 dent acting in accordance with the
 advice of the appropriate authority.
 (3) For the purposes of this Constitution and any
 other law, a person shall not be considered as holding a
 public office by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt
 of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service
 under the Government of Ghana.
 
 134
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Any provision in this Constitution that vests in
 any person or authority power to remove any public officer
 from his office shall be without prejudice to the power of
 any person or authority to abolish any office or to any law
 for compulsory retirement of public officers generally or
 any class of public officer on attaining the age specified
 therein.
 (5) Where power is vested by this Constitution in
 any person or authority to appoint any person to act in or
 perform the functions of any office if the holder thereof is
 himself unable to perform those functions, no such appoint-
 ment shall be called in question on the ground that the
 holder of the office was unable to perform those functions.
 (6) No provision of this Constitution or of any
 other law that any person or authority shall not be subject
 to the direction or control of any other person or authority
 in the performance of any functions under this Constitution
 or that other law shall be construed as precluding a Court
 from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question
 whether that person or authority has performed those
 functions in accordance with this Constitution or any
 other law.
 (7) In this Constitution references to the alteration
 of any of the provisions of this Constitution or of any Act
 of Parliament include references to the amendment, modifi-
 cation or re-enactment, with or without amendment or
 modification of that provision, the suspension or repeal
 of that provision and the making of different provision in
 lieu of that provision.
 173. Where in this Constitution or in any other law EXERCISE OF
 discretionary power is vested in any person or authority,  DISE
 (a) that discretionary power shall be deemed to POWER.
 imply a duty to be fair and candid;
 (b) the exercise of any such discretionary power
 shall not be arbitrary, capricious or biased,
 either by resentment, prejudice or personal
 dislike and shall be in accordance with due
 process of law; and
 
 135
 
 
 The Constitulion
 
 (c) the person or authority, not being a Judge
 or other Judicial Officer in the exercise of his
 judicial functions, in whom the discretionary
 power is vested shall, by constitutional or
 statutory instrument, as the case may be,
 make and publish Regulations, not being
 inconsistent with any provision of this Con-
 stitution or of that other law, which shall
 govern the exercise of that discretionary power.
 IMPLIED     174. In this Constitution and in any other law,
 POWER.
 (a) the power to appoint any person to hold or to
 act in any office in the Public Services shall
 include the power to confirm appointments, to
 exercise disciplinary control over persons hold-
 ing or acting in such offices and to remove
 such persons from office;
 (b) where a power is conferred or a duty is imposed,
 the power may be exercised and the duty shall
 be performed, from time to time, as occasion
 requires;
 (c) where any po'ier is given to any person or
 authority to do or enforce the doing of any
 act or thing, all such powers shall be deemed
 to be also given as are necessary to enable that
 person or authority to do or enforce the
 doing of the act or thing;
 (d) where any power is conferred to make any
 constitutional or statutory instrument, regu-
 lations or rules or pass any resolution or give
 any direction, the power shall be construed as
 including the power, exercisable in like man-
 ner, to amend or to revoke such constitutional
 or statutory instrument, regulations or rules
 or resolution or direction as the case may be;
 (e) words importing male persons shall include
 female persons and corporations;
 
 136
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (f) words in the singular shall include the plural,
 and words in the plural shall include the
 singular;
 (g) where a word is defined, other parts of speech
 and tenses of that word shall have correspond-
 ing meanings;
 (h) words directing or empowering a public officer
 to do any act or thing, or otherwise applying
 to him by the designation of his office, shall
 include his successors in office and all his
 deputies or all other assistants;
 (i) words directing or empowering a Minister of
 State to do an act or thing, or otherwise
 applying to him by the designation of his
 office, shall include a Minister acting for him,
 or if the office is vacant a Minister designated
 to act in that office by or under the authority
 of an Act of Parliament and also his successors
 in office or all his deputies or other assistants;
 (j) where a power is conferred or a duty is imposed
 on the holder of an office as such, the power
 may be exercised and the duty shall be per-
 formed by the person for the time being
 charged with the performance of the functions
 of his office.
 175. Subject to the provisions of article 169 of this Consti- RESIDUAL
 Ou                     .fti POWERS OF
 tution, where on any matter, whether arising out of this PARLIAMENT.
 Constitution or otherwise, there is no provision, express
 or by necessary implication, of this Constitution which
 deals with the matter that has arisen, Parliament shall, by
 an Act of Parliament, not being inconsistent with any
 provision of this Constitution, provide for that matter to
 be dealt with.
 176. The transitional provisions specified in the First TRANS'
 Schedule to this Constitution shall have effect notwith-   NASIONS.
 standing anything to the contrary contained in this Consti- a
 tution.                                                  SCHEDULE.
 
 137
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 REPRINTING   177. The President may, within a period of five years
 OF CONSTITU-..
 ToO.      from the coming into force of this Constitution, cause this
 Constitution to be reprinted and published without the
 provisions of the First Schedule to, and any other transi-
 tional provisions in, this Constitution.
 
 138
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 FIRST SCHEDULE
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 PART I
 PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION AND ELECTION OF
 FIRST PRESIDENT
 1. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Chapter 6 or any PRESDENTAL
 other provision of this Constitution, until the National ETC.
 Assembly otherwise decides the functions of President
 under this Constitution shall be exercised for a period
 not exceeding three years from the coming into force of
 this Constitution, by a Presidential Commission consisting
 of the Chairman of the National Liberation Council who
 shall be Chairman of the Presidential Commission, the
 Deputy Chairman of the National Liberation Council,
 who shall be Deputy Chairman of the Commission, and
 the Chief of Defence Staff of the Armed Forces of Ghana:
 Provided that during the said period of three years
 if any member of the Presidential Commission resigns or
 retires or dies or is found in the manner prescribed by
 article 47 of this Constitution to be incapable of performing
 the functions of his office by reason of physical or mental
 incapacity, the remaining members or member shall con-
 tinue in office and constitute the Presidential Commission.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the exercise by the Presidential Commission of any of the
 functions of the President under this Constitution may,
 if not signified by all the members of the Commission,
 be signified by the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of
 the Commission.
 (3) Any reference in this section to the Chairman
 or Deputy Chairman of the National Liberation Council
 or to the Chief of Defence Staff shall be deemed to be a
 reference to the person holding any such office immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution.
 
 139
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) After all the members of the Presidential Com-
 mission have ceased to hold office as such members under
 the foregoing provisions of this section, an election of the
 first President under this Constitution shall be held in
 accordance with the following provisions of this Part and
 from the time when all the members of the Commission
 cease to hold office until the assumption of office of the
 first President the Speaker of the National Assembly shall
 perform the functions of the President as provided for by
 article 38 of this Constitution.
 (5) For the purposes of the election of the first
 President, the Presidential Electoral College shall be
 constituted as provided for in clause (3) of article 41 of this
 Constitution:
 Provided that where the election of the first Presi-
 dent takes place before the formation of District Councils
 in all the Regions of Ghana under the provisions of articles
 156 to 158 of this Constitution, then the Presidential
 Electoral College for the election of the first President
 shall consist of
 (a) all the members of the National Assembly,
 (b) twenty-four chiefs, three of whom shall be
 elected by each House of Chiefs from among
 the chiefs who are members of that House;
 and any such election shall take place within
 twenty-one days after all the members of the
 Presidential Commission cease to hold office
 as referred to in subsection (4) of this section.
 (6) Any reference in this Constitution to the Presi-
 dent shall, during any period during which the Presidential
 Commission is in existence, have effect with such modifi-
 cations as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions
 of this Schedule, as if it were a reference to the Presidential
 Commission.
 QUALIFICA-    2. The provisions of article 40 of this Constitution
 nomma     shall apply to the election of the first President under the
 provisions of this Part of this Schedule.
 PRESIDE AL   3. (1) The Presiding Officer shall at least twenty-one
 D   oA    days before the date of the presidential election, publish a
 
 140
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 constitutional instrument stating the date, the place and the
 time at which the election of the President shall commence.
 (2) The Presiding Officer shall, seven days before
 the expiration of the date specified in the instrument referred
 to in the preceding subsection, summon the Presidential
 Electoral College which shall meet for the purposes of
 electing the first President under this Constitution.
 4. (1) Before the ballot is ordered to be taken the ELECTION OF
 Presiding Officer shall announce the names and the candi- PRESIDENT.
 dates together with the names of the persons by whom their
 nomination papers are signed.
 (2) If in a presidential ballot
 (a) there are three or more candidates, and
 (b) none of the candidates is elected, and
 (c) one of the candidates receives a smaller number
 of votes than each of the others,
 that one of the candidates shall not be a candidate in any
 subsequent presidential ballot at the same election meeting.
 (3) If in a presidential ballot
 (a) the conditions specified in paragraphs (a) and
 (b) of the immediately preceding subsection
 are satisfied but the condition specified in
 paragraph (c) of that subsection is not; and
 (b) two of the candidates each receives the same
 number of votes and that number is smaller
 than the number of votes received by the other
 candidate or each of the other candidates, as
 the case may be,
 a ballot shall forthwith be held for the purposes of determin-
 ing which of any such two candidates shall be treated for
 the purposes of the immediately preceding subsection as the
 candidate mentioned in paragraph (c) thereof; and the
 candidate who receives the smaller number of the votes cast
 in that ballot shall be so treated and the provisions of that
 subsection shall apply accordingly.
 
 141
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where in a ballot taken pursuant to the provi-
 sions of the immediately preceding subsection each can-
 didate receives the same number of votes, a ballot shall
 be taken to determine which candidate receives the smaller
 number of votes.
 (5) Where in a presidential ballot no candidate is
 declared elected a further presidential ballot shall be taken
 at the same election meeting; and an election meeting shall
 continue until a candidate is declared elected in a presi-
 dential ballot taken at that meeting; but may be adjourned
 from time to time for not more than two days exclusive
 of the days on which and to which it is adjourned.
 (6) The provisions of article 41 of this Consti-
 tution, other than clause (5) thereof, shall apply to the
 election of the first President under the provisions of this
 Part of this Schedule.
 CHALLENGING   5. (1) The Court of Appeal, as established pursuant
 111Z ,   to the provisions of clause (4) of article 102 of this Consti-
 tution, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and deter-
 mine any question as to the validity of the election of the
 President under the provisions of this Part of this Schedule,
 in so far as that question depends upon the qualification
 of any person for election or the interpretation of this
 Constitution.
 (2) The Rules of Court Committee may, by consti-
 tutional instrument, make Rules of Court with respect to
 the persons by whom, the manner in which, and the
 conditions upon which proceedings for the determination
 of any question as is referred to in the preceding sub-
 section may be instituted in the Court of Appeal and
 other purposes connected therewith.
 (3) Where the Court of Appeal declares the election
 invalid the Speaker of the National Assembly shall, as
 soon as it may be, reconvene the Presidential Electoral
 College and the provisions of this Part shall apply accord-
 ingly.
 (4) A person found by the Court of Appeal not to
 have been qualified for election shall not be accepted as a
 candidate for any subsequent ballot for the election of the
 first President.
 
 142
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 PART II
 THE FIRST PARLIAMENT UNDER THIS
 CONSTITUTION, ETC.
 6. (1) An election of members of the National Assem- ELECTION OF
 bly shall be held within thirty days after the coming into F",
 force of this Constitution.                          ASSEMBLY.
 (2) The person who held office as Interim Electoral
 Commissioner immediately before such commencement
 shall act as Electoral Commissioner for the purposes of
 elections.
 (3) The elections shall be held in one hundred and
 forty constituencies and in accordance with such regulations
 as may be prescribed by the Interim Electoral Commissioner
 with the approval of the National Liberation Council.
 (4) Subject to the foregoing provisions articles 33, 34
 and 71 of this Constitution shall apply to the election.
 7. (1) The Clerks to the Constituent Assembly shall, FIRST
 not later than seven days from the date of the general TI"E NArIONA
 election referred to in section 6 of this Schedule, by notice ASSEMBLY.
 published in the Gazette summon a meeting of the National
 Assembly to meet within fourteen days after such date.
 (2) When the National Assembly meets pursuant
 to the provisions of the preceding subsection it shall
 proceed to elect the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker.
 PART III
 THE SUPREME COURT
 8. Until the required number of Justices for a duly cOrosITIoN
 constituted Supreme Court as established pursuant to the "' ";
 provisions of clause (4) of article 102 of this Constitution com.
 are appointed, the Court of Appeal as established pursuant
 to the provisions of the said clause (4) shall perform the
 functions of the Supreme Court as contained in article 106
 oniy.
 
 143
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 PART IV
 MISCELLANEOUS
 1-XISTING 9 (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, and
 OFmICES  save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, every person
 who immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution held or was acting in any office established
 (a) by or in pursuance of the Proclamation for
 the constitution of a National Liberation
 Council for the administration of Ghana and
 for other matters connected therewith dated
 the twenty-sixth day of February, 1966, or
 (b) in pursuance of a Decree of the National
 Liberation Council, or
 (c) by or under the authority of that Council,
 shall, as far as is consistent with the provisions of this
 Constitution, be deemed to have been appointed as from
 the coming into force of this Constitution to hold or to
 act in the equivalent office under this Constitution for a
 period of six months from the date of such commencement,
 unless before or on the expiration of that date, any such
 person shall have been appointed by the appropriate
 appointing authority to hold or to act in that office or
 some other office.
 (2) Any person who, before the coming into force
 of this Constitution, would have been required under the
 law in force to vacate his office at the expiration of any
 period or on the attainment of any age shall, notwith-
 standing the provisions of the preceding subsection,
 vacate his office at the expiration of that period or on the
 attainment of that age.
 (3) The provisions of this section shall be without
 prejudice to any powers conferred by or under this Consti-
 tution or any other law not being inconsistent with this
 Constitution upon any person or authority to make provi-
 sion for the abolition of office, for the removal from office
 of persons holding or acting in any office and for requiring
 persons to retire from office.
 
 144
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) In determining, for the purposes of any law
 relating to retiring benefits or otherwise to length of service,
 the length of service of a public officer to whom the provi-
 sions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section apply,
 service as a public officer under the Government which
 terminates immediately before the coming into force of
 this Constitution shall be deemed to be continuous with
 service as a public officer which begins immediately at such
 commencement.
 (5) Any person to whom the preceding provisions
 of this section apply shall, immediately on the coming into
 force of this Constitution or at any convenient time there-
 after, take and subscribe the oath required for that office
 by law.
 10. Where any matter or thing has been commenced PENDINo
 before the coming into force of this Constitution by any
 person or authority having power in that behalf under the
 existing law, that matter or thing may be carried on and
 completed by the person or authority having power in that
 behalf on or after such commencement and it shall not be
 necessary for any such person or authority to commence
 any such matter or thing de novo.
 11., (1) Subject to the provisions of article 162 of this SUCCmO
 Constitution, all property and all assets which immediately  PROPERW.
 before the coming into force of this Constitution were
 vested in any authority or person for the purposes of,
 or in right of, the Government of Ghana or in the Govern-
 ment of Ghana shall, on the coming into force of this
 Constitution, without further assurance than this section,
 vest in the Lands Commission or the Government of Ghana
 under this Constitution as the case may be.
 (2) Any property which was, immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution, liable to escheat
 or to be forfeited to any person or authority in right of
 the Government of Ghana shall, on such commencement,
 be liable to escheat or to be forfeited to the Government
 of Ghana under this Constitution.
 
 1.45
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Where immediately before the coming into
 force of this Constitution any person held any property
 or assets in trust
 (a) for the President of Ghana under the Consti-
 tution that was suspended or abrogated on the
 twenty-fourth day of February, 1966, or
 (b) for the National Liberation Council,
 for the purposes of, or in right of, the Government of
 Ghana, that person shall, on the coming into force of this
 Constitution, hold such property or assets subject to the
 provisions of article 162 of this Constitution, on the like
 trust for the Government of Ghana established under this
 Constitution.
 (4) In this section, references to property and assets
 vested in or held in trust shall include property and:assets
 vested in or held in trust immediately before the twenty-
 fourth day of February, 1966, for an interest which extended
 beyond the twenty-third day of February, 1966 and has not
 been surrendered.
 DEVOWnON      12. Subject to the provisions of section 11 of this Part
 On OTHERof this Schedule,
 (a) where under any existing law any rights,
 prerogatives, powers, privileges or functions
 are vested in the National Liberation Council,
 those rights, prerogatives, powers, privileges
 and functions shall, on the coming into force of
 this Constitution, vest in the President or such
 other person or authority as is specified under
 this Constitution who, subject to the provisions
 of this Constitution and any other law, shall
 have power to do all things necessary for the
 exercise or performance thereof; and
 (b) any rights, powers, privileges, obligations,
 duties or functions vested in the Government
 of Ghana by any existing law shall continue to
 be so vested.
 
 146
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 13. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, legal LoA Ro-
 proceedings pending immediately before the coming into
 force of this Constitution before any Court, including
 civil proceedings by or against the Government, shall not
 be affected by the coming into force of this Constitiion and
 may he continued accord ingly.
 (2) Where at the commencement of this Constitu-
 tion there is any matter for review before a full bench of
 the Court of Appeal in being immediately before any such
 commencement, that matter for review shall be deemed to
 be an appeal pending before the Supreme Court as estab-
 lished under the provisions of this Constitution.
 (3) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby
 declared that no Court shall entertain any action or take
 any decision or order or grant any remedy or relief in
 any proceedings instituted against the Government of
 Ghana, or any person acting under the authority of the
 Government of Ghana whether before or after the coming
 into force of this Constitution or against any person or
 persons acting in concert or individually to assist or bring
 about the change in government which took place on the
 twenty-fourth day of February, 1966, in respect of any
 act or omission relating to, or consequent upon,
 (a) the overthrow of the government in power
 before the formation of the National Libera-
 tion Council; or
 (b) the suspension of the Constitution which
 came into force on the first day of July, 1960,
 or any part thereof; or
 (c) the establishment of the National Liberation
 Council; or
 (d) the establishment of this Constitution.
 (4) The Constitution which came into force on
 the first day of July, 1960 and was subsequently suspended
 is hereby abrogated.
 
 147
 
 
 The Constituiion
 
 (5) Notwithstanding anything in article 169 of this
 Constitution or in any other provision of this Constitution,
 Parliament shall have no power to amend this subsection
 or subsections (3) and (4) of this section.
 PART V
 CARETAKER GOVERNMENT
 
 NATIONAL
 LIBERAT7ON
 AND EXECU-
 TIVE COUNCIL
 To GOVERN
 UNTIL
 FORMATION
 OF CABINET.
 
 148
 
 14. (1) On the coming into force of this Constitution
 the National Liberation Council shall continue to exercise
 the legislative power of the State until the meeting of the
 National Assembly immediately following the formation
 of the Cabinet.
 (2) On the coming into force of this Constitution
 and until the formation of a Cabinet the Executive Council
 shall continue to exercise such part of the executive power
 of the State as is not inconsistent with any special powers
 conferred on the President by this Constitution.
 (3) On or soon after the coming into force of this
 Constitution every person who served as a member of the
 National Liberation Council shall be paid, as a token
 mark of the Nation's gratitude such gratuity by way of a
 terminal award as shall be determined by the Government
 under this Constitution which immediately succeeds the
 National Liberation Council.
 (4) Any  member of the National Liberation
 Council who retires from public service at any time before
 or after the coming into force of this Constitution shall he
 paid a pension equivalent to the gross emolument to which
 he was or is entitled at the time of such retirement and any
 such pension shall be in lieu of any other pension to which
 any such member may otherwise be entitled on his retire-
 ment from the public service:
 Provided that where the gross emolument at
 the time of such retirement is lower than what it was or is
 at any time before or after the coming into force of this
 Constitution then the pension payable under the provisions
 of this section shall be the higher amount to which any
 such member was or is entitled to at any time before .or
 after the coming into force of this Constwiuion1.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) Notwithstanding anything in article 169 of this
 Constitution or in any other provision of this Constitution,
 until the death of all members of the National Liberation
 Council, Parliament shall have no power to amend this
 subsection or subsection (4) of this section.
 PART VI
 ORIGINAL COPIES OF THE CONSTITUTION, ETC.
 15. (1) The Speaker of the Constituent Assembly shall ORIGINAL
 cause four copies of this Constitution as enacted by the    T
 Constituent Assembly to be printed on vellum or on paper mo, ETC.
 of enduring quality.
 (2) The copies of the said Constitution printed
 under subsection (1) of this section shall be examined by
 the Speaker, Deputy Speaker of the Constituent Assembly
 and at least one of the Clerks of the said Assembly and
 if they are satisfied that these copies are true copies of the
 text of the Constitution as enacted by the Constituent
 Assembly then the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall
 sign on each copy a certificate in the form set out at the
 end of this section and the said Clerk shall sign as witness.
 (3) Any certificate purporting to be signed in
 accordance with subsection (2) of this section shall be
 conclusive evidence of anything stated therein.
 (4) Where the foregoing procedure laid down in this
 section purports to have been followed in relation to
 copies of this Constitution the copies shall be deemed to
 be the original copies of this Constitution and shall be
 conclusive evidence of the terms of this Constitution as
 enacted.
 (5) One of the original copies of this Constitution
 shall be deposited with the National Liberation Council
 and one each of the remainder shall be deposited with the
 Chief Justice, the Speaker of the National Assembly
 elected under this Constitution and the Chief Archivist.
 (6) The Speaker may also cause to be printed such
 further copies of this Constitution as may appear to the
 Speaker to be necessary and shall as soon as practicable
 cause this Constitution to be published in the Gazette.
 
 149
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (7) A copy of the Constitution other than an
 original copy, purporting to have been published by the
 Government Printer, shall be prima facie evidence of the
 terms of this Constitution.
 (8) Notwithstanding anything in article 169 or
 any other provision of this Constitution, Parliament shall
 have no power to amend this subsection or subsections (1)
 to (7) of this section.
 FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF AUTHENTICATION OF THE
 CONSTITUTION
 This printed impression has been carefully compared
 by us with the Constitution which was enacted by the
 Constituent Assembly and found by us to be a true copy
 of that Constitution.
 Speaker of the Constituent    Deputy Speaker of the
 Assembly               Constituent Assembly
 Clerk of the Constituent Assembly, Witness
 
 150
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 SECOND SCHEDULE
 FORMS OF OATHS
 THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
 .. do hereby [in
 the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will bear
 true faith of allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by
 law  established; that I will uphold the sovereignty and
 integrity of Ghana; and that I will preserve, protect and
 defend the Constitution. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or such
 other person as the President may designate.
 THE PRESIDENTIAL OATH
 .......................................................................................  h a v in g  b een  elected
 to the high office of President of Ghana do hereby [in the
 name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will be
 faithful and true to the Republic of Ghana; that I shall
 strive at all times to preserve, protcct and defcnd the Con-
 stitution of the Republic of Ghana and that I do hereby
 dedicate myself to the service and well-being of the people
 of the Republic of Ghana and to do right to all manner of
 persons.
 I further [solemnly swear] [solemnly affirm] that should
 I at any time break this my oath of office I shall submit
 myself to the laws of the Republic of Ghana and suffer
 the penalty therefor. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the Chief Justice.
 OATH OF THE SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Under Clause (4) of Article 38
 I  .................................................................................................................o n  a ssu m in g
 office of President under the provisions of clause (3) of
 article 38 of the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana,
 do hereby [in the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that
 
 151
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 1 shall be faithful and true to the Republic of Ghana; that
 I will strive at all times to preserve, protect and defend
 the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana; and that I
 hereby dedicate myself to the service and well-being of the
 people of Ghana and to do right to all manner of people.
 I further [solemnly swear] [solemnly affirm] that should I at
 any time break this my oath of office, I shall submit myself
 to the laws of the Republic of Ghana and suffer the penalty
 therefor. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the Chief Justice.
 THE JUDICIAL OATH
 I    ......  .........                  .  having  been
 appointed [Chief Justice, a Justice of the Supreme Court,
 a Justice of the Court of Appeal, a Justice of the High
 Court of Justice, etc.] do hereby [in the name of God swear]
 [solemnly affirm] that I will bear true faith of allegiance
 to the Republic of Ghana as by law established; that
 I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of the Republic
 of Ghana; and that I will truly and faithfully perform the
 functions of my office without fear or favour, affection
 or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the
 laws of Ghana. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or such
 other person as the Chief Justice may designate.
 OATH OF COUNCILLOR OF STATE
 I .................................................................................................................d o  [s o le m n ly
 swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will faithfully and con-
 scientiously perform my duties as a member of the Council
 of State and uphold and defend the Constitution of the
 Republic of Ghana. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President.
 
 152
 
 
 The Constilution
 
 THE PRIME MINISTER'S OATH
 I...............................................  .  a v in g  b ee n
 appointed the Prime Minister of the Republic of Ghana
 do hereby [in the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm]
 that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of
 Ghana as by law established; that I will uphold the integrity
 of the Republic of Ghana; that I will faithfully and con-
 scientiously discharge my duties as Prime Minister; and
 that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance
 with the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana and the
 laws and conventions of Parliament without fear or favour
 or affection or ill-will. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President.
 OATH OF THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
 I         .................. ................................. h a v in g  b ee n
 designated and recognised as Leader of the Opposition in
 the National Assembly, do hereby [in the name of God
 swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will at all times well and
 truly serve the Republic of Ghana in the office of Leader
 of the Opposition in the National Assembly; that I will
 hear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana
 as by law established; that I will uphold the integrity of
 the Republic of Ghana; that I will faithfully and conscien-
 tiously discharge my duties as Leader of the Opposition
 in the National Assembly, and that I will do right to all
 manner of people in accordance with the Constitution of
 the Republic of Ghana and the laws and conventions of
 Parliament without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
 To be sworn before the President.
 
 153
 
 
 he Constitution
 
 THE CABINET OATH
 I ................................................................. ..........  ...................................h a v in g  b e e n
 appointed a member of the Cabinet do hereby [in the name
 of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will not directly
 or indirectly reveal such matters as shall be debated in the
 Cabinet and committed to my secrecy. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President.
 THE OATH OF MINISTER OF STATE
 I                                          havin........................having  been
 appointed Minister of State of the Republic of Ghana do
 hereby [in the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I
 will at all times well and truly serve the Republic of Ghana
 in the office of Minister of State; that I will support and
 uphold the Constitution of Ghana as by law established;
 that I will, to the best of my judgment, at all times when
 thereto required freely give my counsel and advice for the
 good management of public affairs of the Republic of
 Ghana; and that I will not directly or indirectly reveal any
 matters that shall come to my knowledge in the discharge
 of my duties and committed to my secrecy as Minister of
 State. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President.
 THE OATH OF SECRECY
 I...... ...  ................................................................................h ol d in g  th e  o tfic e
 of  .....  ......h........................... ...........................do  hereby  [in  the  nam e  of
 God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will not directly or
 indirectly communicate or reveal any matter to any person
 which shall be brought under my consideration or shall
 come to my knowledge in the discharge of my official
 duties save as may be required for the discharge of my
 official duties or as may be specially permitted by law.
 To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or such
 other person as the President may designate.
 
 154
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 TIE OFFICIAL OATH
 I..........................................  ............. d o  h ereb y  [in
 the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will at
 all times well and truly serve the Republic of Ghana in
 the  office  of ................ .............................. ..  and  that  I  w ill  support
 and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana as
 by law established. (So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President or such other person as
 the President may designate.
 THE SPEAKER'S OATH
 I  ............................................................................................................. d o  h e re b y  [in
 the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will bear
 true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by
 law established; that I will uphold the integrity of the
 Republic of Ghana; that I will faithfully and conscientiously
 discharge my duties as Speaker of the National Assembly;
 and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance
 with the Constitution of Ghana and the laws and conven-
 tions of Parliament without fear or favour or affection or
 ill-will. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the Chief Justice.
 THE OATH OF A MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 I  .............................  .                    b  n...................................................  h a v in  b e e n
 elected a member of the National Assembly do hereby [in the
 name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will bear true
 faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by
 law established; that I will uphold and defend the Consti-
 tution of the Republic of Ghana and that I will faithfully
 and conscientiously discharge the duties of a member of
 the National Assembly.
 To be sworn before the Speaker.
 
 I _
 
 
 The Constitution
 THE OATH OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL
 .................................... having been
 appointed Auditor-General of the Republic of Ghana do
 hereby [in the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that
 I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of
 Ghana, that I will uphold and defend the Constitution of
 the Republic of Ghana and that I will truly and faithfully
 perform the functions of my office without fear or favour
 or affection or ill-will. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President or such other person as the
 Presideit anay desigqnaec.
 
 
</pre>
