<pre>
 Central African Republic
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC'
 Constitutional laws of February 9, 1959, November 17, 1960,,
 April 20, 1961 and December 21, 1962.
 - PREAMBLE
 The Ubangi people solemnly proclaims its attachment to the rights of
 man, to the principles of democracy and of self-determination of peoples.
 By its vote of September 28, 1958, it freely adopted the Constitution
 of the Community founded on the equality and the solidarity of the
 peoples who compose it.
 On the 1st of December 1958, by a free and unanimous decision of the
 representatives elected by the people, Ubangi Shari chose to constitute
 itself as the "Central African Republic," member-state of the Community.
 Finally, in August 13, 1960, the Central African Republic proclaimed
 its independence.
 The Central African Republic proposes to do everything possible to
 bring about African unity. It intends that the development of its people
 shall be carried on with dignity and by work. It solemnly proclaims the
 fundamental rights and liberties of democracy.
 The human person is sacred. All agents of public authority have the
 absolute obligation to respect and protect it.
 The Republic recognizes the existence of inviolable and inalienable
 rights of man as the basis of any human community, of peace and of
 justice in the world.
 Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality
 provided that he does not infringe upon the rights of others or transgress
 the lawful constitutional order.
 Everyone has the right to life and physical integrity of person. Personal
 liberty is inviolable. These rights may not be abridged except by law.
 already in force before the act was committed. The right of defense is
 inviolable in all the states and at all stages of the procedure.
 All human beings are equal before the law.
 Men and women have equal rights.
 In the Central African Republic, there is neither subject nor privilege
 of place, of birth, of person or of family.
 Everyone has the right to access without hindrance to the sources of
 learning.
 Everyone has the right, with due regard for the laws and the honor
 of others, to express and diffuse freely his opinions by the spoken or
 written word or through pictures.
 All citizens have the right freely to form associations and societies,
 subject to compliance with the laws and regulations.
 Secrecy of correspondence as well as secrecy of postal, telegraphic
 and telephonic communications is inviolable. Restrictions to this inviolability may be ordered only by law.
 Subject to due regard for the right of property, all citizens have the
 right to move and to settle freely throughout the Republic. This right
 shall not be limited except by law.
 No one may be subjected to security measures, except in cases provided
 by law.
 The right of property is guaranteed by the present Constitution. No one
 may be deprived of it except in cases of public necessity, legally establish-
 ed, and on condition that a just indemnification be paid in advance.
 The dwelling is inviolable. Searches may be ordered only by a judge or
 -if there is danger in the home-by other authorities designated by law;
 they may not be undertaken in any other form that that prescribed by
 law.
 Moreover, measures which infringe upon or restrict the inviolability
 of the dwelling may only be taken to guard against a collective danger or
 to protect persons in mortal danger and also, in accordance with a law,
 to protect the public order against imminent danger, particularly to
 combat the risks of epidemics or to protect youth in danger.
 Marriage and the family constitute the natural and moral basis of
 the human community and they are placed under the particular protection
 of the State.
 The State and the public bodies together have a duty to watch over the
 physical and moral health of the family and to encourage it socially.
 Parents have the natural right and primordial duty to bring up their
 children so as to provide them with good physical, intellectual and
 moral abilities. They are supported in this task by the State and the
 public bodies.
 Children born out of wedlock shall have the same rights to assistance
 as legitimate children.
 
 51
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 Youth shall be protected by measures and institutions of the State
 and of the public bodies against exploitation and moral, intellectual
 and physical abandonment.
 The State and the public bodies have the right and duty to create the
 basic conditions and public institutions which will guarantee education
 for children.
 Public schools must be provided for the education of youth. Their
 establishment devolves upon both the State and the public bodies.
 Private schools may be opened with the authorization of the State.
 They shall be placed under its control. Authorization must be accorded
 when the private schools, by their program and organization, as well as
 by the training of their teachers, fulfil the conditions necessary to give
 an education which conforms to the official programs or is authorized
 under the conditions fixed by a particular law.
 Freedom of conscience, the free expression and practice of religion,
 under the conditions of public order, shall be guaranteed to all.
 Religious institutions and communities have the right to develop
 without hindrance. They shall be free from the tutelage of the State
 and shall manage and administer their affairs independently. They shall
 be recognized as a factor of moral education.
 The law shall protect the right to work.
 No one's right to work or to employment may be encroached upon by
 reason of his origins, his opinions or his beliefs.
 Trade union rights may be limited only by law.
 The right to strike shall be exercised within the framework of the
 laws which govern it and may in no case infringe upon the liberty to
 work or the free exercise of the right of property.
 Every worker, through the medium of his delegates, shall take part
 in the determination of working conditions.
 Special laws shall fix the conditions for relief and protection which
 society accords to the workers.
 Accordingly, the Constituent Assembly of the Central African Republic
 adopts, as a fundamental law regulating the rights and duties of citizens,
 the constitutional law which follows:
 TITLE I
 THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. The Central African Republic, indivisible, secular, democratic
 and social, is a free, independent and sovereign state.
 The official language of the Republic is French.'
 1 On November 18, 1964, Sangho became the official language by an amendment,
 voted by the National Assembly by acclamation. Le Monde, November 20, 1964.
 
 52
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 The national anthem is the "Renaissance."
 The national emblem is a flag with four horizontal stripes (blue, white,
 green, yellow), crossed perpendicularly down the middle by a red stripe
 of the same width, with a five pointed yellow star in the upper corner.
 Its motto is "Unity-Dignity-Work."
 * The principle of the Republic is government of the people, by the
 people and for the people.
 Art. 2. Sovereignty belongs to the people, who shall exercise it through
 their representatives or by means of referendum.
 No section of the people nor any individual may usurp this right.
 Suffrage may be either direct or indirect under the conditions provided
 by special laws.
 It shall always be universal, equal and secret.
 All Central African citizens of both sexes who have reached their
 majority and enjoy civil and political rights, may vote under the conditions
 determined by law; similarly and on condition of reciprocity, citizens of
 the Community may vote.
 The people shall exercise its sovereignty freely and democratically
 within a single national political movement, "The Movement for Social
 Evolution of Black Africa" (MESAN).
 TITLE II
 THE LEGISLATIVE POWER
 Art. 3. The National Assembly shall be elected for five years by uni-
 versal, direct and secret suffrage.
 Art. 4. An organic law shall determine the number of deputies, their
 remuneration, the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and offices
 incompatible with membership in the Assembly.
 Art. 5. No deputy shall be prosecuted, investigated, arrested, detained
 or tried on account of opinions expressed or votes cast by him in the
 performance of his duties.
 No deputy may, for the duration of his term of office, be prosecuted
 or arrested for criminal or minor offences, without the authorization of
 the National Assembly, except in flagrante delicto.
 The detention or the prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 Assembly so requests.
 However, the National Assembly may, upon proposal of the Directing
 Committee of MESAN, deprive of their office deputies guilty of serious
 lapses in their duties as representatives of the people.
 Art. 6. The President shall be elected for the duration of the legislature.
 The other members of the Secretariat of the Assembly shall be elected at
 the beginning of each official year.
 
 53
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 Art. 7. The Assembly shall hold two ordinary sessions a year. The
 first shall open during the first half of March and the second during the
 second half of October. The duration of each ordinary session may not
 exceed sixty days. Sessions shall be opened within the time limits specified
 above at the request of the President of the Republic and upon convo-
 cation of the President of the Assembly. They shall be closed by the
 President of the Republic.
 Art. 8. The National Assembly shall hold extraordinary sessions when
 called by the President of the Republic or by two thirds of the deputies
 to consider a specific agenda.
 When the extraordinary session is called by the President of the
 Republic, he shall convene the Assembly by decree taken in the Council
 of Ministers after consultation with the Secretariat of the Assembly.
 In the second case, the President of the National Assembly shall fix
 the date of opening in agreement with the Council of Ministers.
 All extraordinary sessions shall be closed by the President of the
 Republic and the closure decree of those held at the request of deputies
 shall be issued as soon as the Assembly has exhausted the Agenda and at
 the latest fifteen days after its meeting.
 Only the President of the Republic may request a new session before the
 expiration of the month which follows the closure decree of the extra-
 ordinary session.
 Art. 9. The sessions of the legislative Assembly shall be public. Reports
 of the debates shall be published in the Journal 0/ficiel.
 The National Assembly may sit in secret committee upon request of
 the Government or of one third of its members.
 TITLE III
 THE EXECUTIVE POWER
 Art. 10. The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years.
 An organic law shall regulate the composition of the electoral college, the
 conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices incompatible
 with the presidency.
 Art. 11. The President of the Republic shall assume the total executive
 power.
 With the advice of the Directing Committee of MESAN, he shall
 appoint the ministers and secretaries of state, who shall be responsible
 to him, and shall terminate their functions.
 He shall preside over the Council of Ministers, draw up the general
 policy of the Government, supervise its application and inform the
 National Assembly of its evolution either directly or by message.
 He shall exercise the regulatory power, ensure the execution of the laws
 and sign ordinances and decrees.
 
 54
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 He shall have control of the administration and make appointments
 to the public service.
 He shall ensure the maintenance of order and of public security.
 He shall be the Head of the Armed Forces.
 He shall accredit Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign
 powers. Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary shall be accredited to him.
 He shall negotiate and ratify treaties.
 He shall have the right of pardon.
 He shall confer the decorations of the Central African Republic.
 He may delegate his powers to members of the Government except
 for those listed in Article 13 below.
 Art. 12. When the institutions of the Republic and the fulfilment of
 its obligations are threatened by a clear and present danger, and the
 regular functioning of the constitutional governmental authorities is
 interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take, in the Council
 of Ministers, the measures required by these circumstances after con-
 sultation with the President of the National Assembly and of the Consti-
 tutional Council.
 He may, among other things, decree martial law in the Council of
 Ministers under the conditions provided by law. The extension of martial
 law beyond fifteen days lies within the province of law.
 He shall inform the National Assembly and eventually the country,
 of the measures taken in a message. Such measures must have as their
 purpose enabling, as soon as possible, the constitutional governmental
 authorities to accomplish their mission.
 The National Assembly shall meet by right. It may not be dissolved
 during the exercise of martial law.
 Art. 13. The acts of the President of the Republic other than those
 provided in Articles 11 (appointment and termination of members of the
 Government), 12 (messages to the National Assembly), 14 (second reading
 of a bill), and 23 (reference to the Constitutional Council) shall be counter-
 signed by the Ministers concerned.
 Art. 14. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws within
 fifteen days following the transmission to the Government of the finally
 adopted law.
 He may, before the expiration of this time limit, ask the National
 Assembly for a reconsideration of the law or of certain of its articles.
 This reconsideration may not be refused.
 
 55
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 TITLE IV
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE LEGISLATIVE
 POWER AND THE EXECUTIVE POWER
 Art. 15. Members of the Government shall have access to the Assembly
 and to the commissions. They shall be heard upon request.
 They may be assisted by governmental commissioners. A message
 from the President of the Republic may not be followed by a debate
 unless he so requests.
 Art. 16. The legislative Assembly alone shall pass the laws.
 The President may, in order to carry out his program, ask the Assembly
 to authorize him for a limited period to take through ordinances measures
 which are normally within the domain of law. The ordinances shall be
 enacted in the Council of Ministers. They shall come into force upon
 their publication but shall become null and void if the bill for their
 ratification is not submitted to the Assembly before the date set by the
 enabling act.
 I At the expiration of the time limit mentioned in the first paragraph
 of the present article, the ordinances may only be modified by law in
 matters which are in the legislative domain.
 The enabling act shall become null and void if the Assembly is dissolved.
 In case of emergency recognized by the Constitutional Council, and if the
 National Assembly is not in session, the President of the Republic in the
 Council of Ministers and with the advice of the Secretariat of the Assembly,
 may take by ordinance measures which are normally within the legislative
 domain. These ordinances, which shall enter into force upon their publi-
 cation, shall be the subject of a bill of ratification which must be filed
 on the first day of the next ordinary session at the latest, failing which
 they shall become null and void.
 Art. 17. Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to citizens for
 the exercise of their public liberties;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts,
 inheritance and gifts, property rights, civil and commercial obligations;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security;
 - the status of magistrates and the fundamental guarantees granted
 to civil and military personnel employed by the State;
 - the electoral system of the National Assembly and the public assem-
 blies;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefor, criminal procedure, the creation of new juridical
 systems and amnesty;
 
 .56
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 - the general organization of national defense;
 - education;
 - the basis, the rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all types;
 - the financial system, the control of expenditure and the currency;
 - the creation of governmental establishments and associations of
 a mixed economy;
 - the nationalization of enterprises and the transfer of property of
 enterprises from the public to the private sector.
 The financial laws shall determine the resources and obligations of the
 State under the conditions and with the reservations to be provided by an
 organic law.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives
 of the economic and social action of the State.
 Art. 18. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall devolve from the regulatory power of the President or the Govern-
 ment.
 The legislative texts concerning these matters may be modified by
 decree.
 Art. 19. The President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers and the
 deputies shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 Bills shall be sent to the Government before any examination by the
 Assembly or its commissions.
 Deputies and the Government alike shall have the right of amendment.
 Art. 20. Bills and amendments introduced by deputies shall not be
 considered, except with the agreement of the President of the Republic,
 if their adoption would result in either the reduction of public revenues,
 or the creation or increase of public expenditures.
 Art. 21. The discussion of Government bills shall pertain to the text
 submitted by the Government.
 Art. 22. Laws which the Constitution characterizes as organic laws
 shall be passed and modified only on the initiative of the Government
 and by an absolute majority of the deputies.
 Art. 23. The budget bill shall be submitted in balance at the latest
 on the eve of the opening of the budget session. If the Assembly has not
 acted on the entire budget before the end of the ordinary session, the
 Government may put into force by ordinance the provisions of the bill
 which have been completed and modified by amendments voted by the
 Assembly and accepted by the Government.
 Art. 24. The Government may request an emergency debate of any
 bill except for the budget. The emergency debate may not be refused.
 If the Assembly has not acted within eight days of the emergency
 request, the Government may put into force by ordinance the provisions
 of the bill which have been completed or modified by amendments voted
 by the Assembly and accepted by the Government.
 
 57
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 Art. 25. The discussion of bills filed or agreed upon by the Government
 shall have priority on the agenda of the Assembly in the order set by the
 Government.
 Art. 26. After the proceedings have opened, the Government may
 bar the study of any amendment not already studied in Commission.
 Should the Government so request, the Assembly, being informed, shall
 give an opinion by a single vote on all or part of the text under dis-
 cussion, keeping only the amendments proposed or accepted by the
 Government.
 Art. 27. When the regular functioning of the Assembly is interrupted,
 the President of the Republic may pronounce in the Council of Ministers
 the dissolution of the National Assembly after consulting its Secretariat
 and with the agreement of the Constitutional Council. New elections shall
 follow within a minimum time limit of two months.
 Art. 28. A Constitutional Council shall be instituted to watch over the
 regularity of the elections of the President of the Republic and to examine
 complaints and proclaim the results of the voting.
 The Constitutional Council shall rule in cases of dispute on the regularity
 of the elections of deputies. It shall watch over the regularity of the
 operations of a referendum and proclaim the results.
 Other than these powers and those conferred by Articles 12, 16 and 27,
 the Council shall rule on the constitutionality of ordinary and organic
 laws submitted to it before promulgation by the President of the Republic
 or the President of the National Assembly. Reference to the Council shall
 suspend the normal time limit for promulgation. It shall also, at the request
 of the President of the Republic or the President of the Assembly, settle
 conflicts of competence between the Assembly and the Government
 relating to the respective domains of law and regulation.
 An organic law shall stipulate the composition, organization and
 functioning of the Constitutional Council.
 Until the date of promulgation of such a law, the powers of the Council
 shall be exercised by a Commission composed of the President of the
 Court of Appeal and two members appointed, one by the President of the
 Republic and the other by the President of the National Assembly.
 TITLE V
 THE JUDICIAL POWER
 Art. 29. The judicial power shall be independent of the legislative and
 executive powers.
 It shall be rendered in the territory of the State in the name of the
 people.
 Art. 30. The administrative jurisdiction shall be the judge of excesses
 
 58
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 of authority, of the responsibility of governmental authorities and of
 elections other than those of the deputies and of the President of the
 Republic.
 Art. 31. The High Council of the Judiciary shall guarantee the inde-
 pendence of magistrates. A law shall stipulate its composition, procedure
 and powers.
 TITLE VI
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 32. The territorial units of the Republic shall be created by law.
 They shall administer themselves freely and democratically under
 conditions provided in an organic law.
 TITLE VII
 TREATIES, AGREEMENTS AND CONVENTIONS
 Art. 33. The Central African Republic may conclude agreements of
 association, understanding or union including partial or total renunciation
 of sovereignty, with other sovereign states.
 Art. 34. The National Assembly shall authorize the President of the
 Republic to ratify commercial treaties and treaties or agreements relative
 to international organization, those that imply a commitment for the
 finances of the State, those that modify provisions of a legislative nature,
 those relative to the status of persons and those that call for an exchange
 or addition of territory. In the latter case, the populations concerned
 must give their prior consent by referendum.
 Other treaties shall be ratified by the President of the Republic alone.
 Art. 35. Treaties, agreements and conventions duly ratified and
 published, shall have authority superior to that of the laws, subject,
 for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
 TITLE VIII
 AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
 Art. 36. The President of the Republic and the National Assembly
 shall have the right to initiate amendments of this Constitution.
 Any bill of amendment introduced by the President of the Republic
 must be approved by the Council of Ministers.
 Any bill introduced by the deputies must be signed by at least one-
 third of the members of the Assembly.
 Amendments must be passed by a two-thirds majority of the members
 of the Assembly.
 
 50
 
 
 Central African Republic
 
 If the bill of amendment has been voted by a majority of the members
 of the Assembly, but has not received the two-thirds majority specified
 above, the President of the Republic may submit it to a referendum.
 A law shall determine the conditions of the referendum.
 A constitutional law adopted by means of a referendum must be pro-
 mulgated within five days of its adoption.
 Art. 37. No amendment procedure may be retained if it violates the
 republican form of the Government and the democratic principles which
 govern the Constitution.
 TITLE IX
 SPECIAL POWERS - MISCELLANEOUS
 PROVISIONS
 Art. 38. The Legislative Assembly of the Central African Republic
 shall be transformed automatically into the National Assembly and the
 term of its deputies shall expire at the normal date fixed for the end of
 the incumbent legislature.
 The secretariat of the Assembly shall remain in office until that date.
 The President of the Government shall retain the title and prerogatives
 of Head of State conferred upon him by Law No. 60/156 of August 14,
 1960, and shall exercise the powers assigned to him by the present Consti-
 tution until the date fixed for the end of the incumbent legislature.
 Art. 39. The laws and regulations in force at the date of promulgation
 of the present Constitution shall remain in effect insofar as they are not
 contrary to the above provisions and insofar as they are not abrogated
 or modified by the appropriate authorities.
 
 60
 
 
</pre>
