“INTERIM CONSTITUTION of TANZANIA'
 11th July, 1965
 Whereas freedom, justice, fraternity and concord are founded upon the recognition of the equality of all men and of their inherent dignity, and upon the recognition of the rights of all men to protection of life, liberty and property, to freedom of conscience, freedom of expression and freedom of association, to participate in their own government, and to receive a just return for their labors:
 And when men are united together in a community it is their duty to respect the rights and dignity of their fellow men, to uphold the laws of the State, and to conduct the affairs of the State so that its resources are preserved, developed and enjoyed for the benefit of its citizens as a whole and so as to prevent the exploitation of one man by another:
 And whereas such rights are best maintained and protected and such duties are most equitably disposed in a democratic society where the government is responsible to a freely elected Parliament representative of the People and where the courts of law are free and impartial:
 Now therefore this Constitution, which makes provision for the Government of Tanzania as such a democratic society is hereby enacted by the Parliament of the United Republic of Tanzania.

 CHAPTER I
 THE UNITED REPUBLIC,
 THE PARTY AND THE PEOPLE
 Part 1. The United Republic and the Party
 1. Tanzania is a United Sovereign Republic.
 2. (1) The territories of Tanzania consist of Tanganyika and Zanzibar,
 and include territorial waters.
 1 An Act to declare the Interim Constitution of Tanzania. Act 1965 No. 43. Chapter
 596 of the Laws (Principal Legislation), Government Printer, Dar es Salaam 1969.
 Supplied by the Government Publications Agency in June 1972. Ed.
 
 (2) The appropriate legislative authority may provide for the division
 of Tanzania into regions, districts and other areas.
 3. (1) There shall be one political Party in Tanzania.
 (2) Until the union of the Tanganyika African National Union with the Afro-Shirazi Party (which United Party shall constitute the one political Party), the Party shall, in and for Tanganyika, be the Tanganyika African National Union and, in and for Zanzibar, be the Afro-Shirazi Party.
 (3) All political activity in Tanzania, other than that of the organs of State of the United Republic, the organs of the Executive and Legislature for Zanzibar, or such local government authorities as may be established by or under a law of the appropriate legislative authority, shall be conducted by or under the auspices of the Party.
 (4) The constitution set out in the First Schedule to this Constitution shall be the constitution of the Tanganyika African National Union, and such constitution may be amended from time to time (and provision made therein for and consequent upon the union of the Tanganyika African National Union with the Afro-Shirazi Party) in accordance with the provisions in that behalf in that constitution.
 Part 2. The People
 4. (1) Every citizen of Tanzania who has attained the age of twenty-
 one years shall, unless he is disqualified for registration by an Act of
 Parliament, be entitled, on application at a time and place appointed in
 that behalf, to be registered as a voter for the purpose of elections by the
 people, and no other person may be so registered.
 (2) Every person who is registered as aforesaid shall, unless he is dis-
 qualified from voting by an Act of Parliament, be entitled, on presenting
 himself at a time and place appointed in that behalf, to vote at elections
 by the people in the part of Tanzania in which he is so registered, and no
 other person may so vote:
 Provided that an Act of Parliament may permit a person registered in
 one part of Tanzania to vote in some other part of Tanzania in an election
 for a constituency member of the National Assembly to represent that
 other part if he is a candidate at such election, and in an election for a
 President of the United Republic held contemporaneously with such election for a constituency member, and nothing in this subsection shall be
 construed as preventing any such person so voting in such other part in
 lieu of voting in the part where he is registered as a voter.
 (3) No Act of Parliament shall provide for the disqualification of any
 citizen of Tanzania from registration as a voter for the purpose of elections
 by the people, or for the disqualification of any such registered voter from
 voting at such elections, except on the grounds of his allegiance to another
 State, infirmity of mind, criminality, absence or failure to produce evidence of age, citizenship or registration.
 
 Tanzania
 
 927
 
 
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the registration of
 voters for the purpose of elections by the People and voting at such elections
 shall be regulated by Act of Parliament, and such registration shall be
 carried out and such elections shall be conducted, in accordance with this
 Constitution and any Act of Parliament in that behalf, under the direction
 and supervision of the Electoral Commission.
 5. Every citizen of Tanzania who has attained the age of eighteen years
 and who subscribes to the beliefs, aims and objects of the Party as ex-
 pressed in the constitution of the Party shall, on payment of the fees and
 subscriptions provided for in the constitution of the Party, be entitled to
 be a member of the Party.
 CHAPTER II
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC
 6. (1) There shall be a President of the United Republic who shall be
 the Head of State and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
 (2) Except as may be otherwise provided by law, in the exercise of his
 functions the President shall act in his own discretion and shall not be
 obliged to follow advice tendered by any other person.
 7. (1) The President shall be elected by the People in accordance with
 the provisions of this Constitution and, subject thereto, the provisions of
 an Act of Parliament for regulating the election of a President.
 (2) An election of a President shall be held whenever one of the following
 events occurs, that is to say -
 (a) Parliament is dissolved;
 (b) the President dies;
 (c) the President resigns his office without first having dissolved
 Parliament;
 (d) where, in pursuance of section 9 of this Constitution, the Chief
 Justice has certified that the President is unable to discharge his
 functions and has not, within the succeeding period of six months,
 withdrawn such certificate.
 (3) Within fifty days of the dissolution of Parliament, or twenty-one
 days of the occurrence of any other event on which an election of a President is to be held, an Electoral Conference of the Party, constituted in accordance with the provisions in that behalf in the constitution of the
 Party, shall meet; and such Electoral Conference shall nominate a citizen
 of Tanzania who has attained the age of thirty years and is a member of the
 Party as the sole Presidential candidate.
 (4) The Presidential candidate nominated by an Electoral Conference
 shall be presented for election by the People who may ballot either for or
 against the candidate; and if, on such a ballot -
 
 928
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 (a) the majority of the votes cast are in favor of the candidate, the
 candidate shall thereby be elected President and the Electoral Commission shall declare his election;
 (b) the majority of the votes cast are not in favor of the candidate,
 the candidate shall not be elected President: and the Electoral Conference shall nominate some other person as sole Presidential candidate in
 accordance with subsection (3), and a ballot shall be held in accordance
 with this subsection in respect of that candidate.
 (5) Where a person has been declared by the Electoral Commission to
 have been elected President, his election shall not be questioned in any
 court.
 8. (1) The President shall assume office on the day following the declaration of his election and shall, unless he sooner dies or resigns, continue in office until the person elected President at the next following Presidential election assumes office.
 (2) Upon his assumption of office, the President shall take and subscribe
 the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as
 may be prescribed by Act of Parliament.
 9. (1) Whenever the office of President is vacant, or the President is
 absent from Tanzania, or the Chief Justice, acting in his discretion after
 receiving a resolution from the Cabinet requesting him to exercise his
 powers in that behalf and after considering medical evidence, certifies that
 the President is, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, unable to dis-
 charge the functions of his office, and has not subsequently withdrawn
 such certificate on the ground that the President has recovered his capacity,
 the functions of the office of President shall be discharged by the first of
 the following Ministers who is present and able to act: -
 (a) the First Vice-President of the United Republic;
 (b) the Second Vice-President of the United Republic;
 (c) some other Minister appointed by the President in that behalf;
 (d) some other Minister appointed by the Cabinet in that behalf;
 and such Minister shall discharge such functions during the vacancy in the
 office, or the absence or incapacity, as the case may be, of the President, or,
 in the case of a Minister other than the First Vice-President, until some
 other Minister having a prior right, under the provisions of this subsection,
 to discharge such functions is present and able to act.
 (2) If the President dies or resigns his office, or is absent from Tanzania,
 or if the Chief Justice, acting in his discretion after considering medical
 evidence, certifies that the President is, by reason of physical or mental
 infirmity, unable to discharge the functions of his office, at any time when,
 due to vacancy in any office, absence or inability to act, no Minister is
 empowered by subsection (1) to discharge the functions of the office of
 President and there are no other Ministers in the Cabinet present and able
 to act -
 (a) the certificate of the Chief Justice shall have effect as if it had been
 preceded by a resolution of the Cabinet requesting him to exercise
 his powers in that behalf and shall not be questioned in any court
 notwithstanding it was not preceded by such resolution; and
 (b) the Speaker of the National Assembly shall appoint a member of
 the National Assembly who appears to him likely to command the
 support of the majority of the members of the National Assembly or,
 if Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a member of the National
 Assembly immediately before such dissolution, to discharge the
 functions of the office of President during the vacancy in the office,
 or the absence or incapacity, as the case may be, of the President, or,
 if such an appointment is made during the absence or inability to act
 of any Minister empowered by subsection (1) to discharge the functions of the office of President, until such Minister is present and able
 to act.
 (3) Whenever the President -
 (a) is absent from Dar es Salaam;
 (b) is absent from Tanzania for a period which he believes will be of
 short duration; or
 (c) by reason of illness that he has reason to believe will be of short
 duration, considers it desirable so to do,
 he may, by directions in writing, appoint the First Vice-President, or, if for
 any reason he considers it expedient so to do, some other Minister, to
 discharge, subject to such restrictions and exceptions as he may specify,
 the functions of the office of President during such absence or illness;
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as derogating
 from the power of the President contained in any other law to delegate
 any function to any other person.
 (4) For the purposes -
 (a) of subsections (1) and )2) -
 (i) the President shall not be regarded as absent from Tanzania by
 reason only of the fact that he is in passage from one part of Tan-
 zania to another, or where he has given a direction under subsection
 (3) and that direction is in force;
 (ii) references to presence or absence, or to ability to act, in relation
 to a Minister, are references to his presence in or absence from
 Tanzania or, as the case may be, to the absence of any physical or
 mental infirmity rendering him unable to discharge his functions;
 and
 (iii) the certificate of the Chief that any Minister is, by reason of
 physical or mental infirmity, unable to act shall not be questioned
 in any court; and
 (b) of subsection (1), the Cabinet shall be deemed to be duly consti-
 tuted notwithstanding any vacancy or the absence of any member,
 
 930
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 and a resolution of the majority of the members of the Cabinet who
 are present and voting shall be deemed to be a resolution of the
 Cabinet.
 (5) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a person
 discharging the functions of the office of President under this section shall
 not have the power to remove a Vice-President from office.
 (6) A Minister, a member of the National Assembly or other person shall
 not, by reason of his exercising the functions of the office of President
 under this section, vacate his seat in, or be disqualified for election as a
 constituency member of, the National Assembly.
 10. (1) The President shall receive such salary and allowances, and on
 retirement such pension, gratuity or allowances, as may be determined by
 the National Assembly, and such salary, allowances, pension and gratuity
 are hereby charged on the Consolidated Fund of the United Republic.
 (2) The salary and allowances of the President shall not be reduced
 during his period of office.
 11. (1) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or continued against the President while in office.
 (2) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President
 shall be instituted whilst he is in office in respect of anything done or not
 done, or purporting to have been done or not done, by him in his personal
 capacity, whether before or after he entered upon his office, unless, at least
 thirty days before the proceedings are instituted, notice in writing has
 been delivered to him or sent to him in the manner prescribed by Act of
 Parliament, stating the nature of the proceedings, the cause of action, the
 name, description and place of residence of the party by whom the proceedings are to be instituted and the relief which he claims.
 CHAPTER III
 THE EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATURE
 OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC
 Part 1. The Executive
 12. (1) Executive power with respect to all Union matters in and for
 the United Republic and with respect to all other matters in and for
 Tanganyika is vested in the President.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the executive power
 may be exercised by the President either directly or through persons
 holding office in the service of the United Republic.
 (3) Nothing in this section shall prevent a law from conferring functions
 on persons or authorities other than the President.
 13. (1) There shall be two Vice-Presidents of the United Republic (who
  shall be styled the First Vice-President and the Second Vice-President
 respectively), one of whom shall be the principal assistant of the President
 in the discharge of his executive functions in relation to Zanzibar and,
 under the style of President of Zanzibar, the head of the Executive for
 Zanzibar, and the other shall be the principal assistant of the President in
 the discharge of his executive functions in relation to Tanganyika and the
 leader of Government business in the National Assembly.
 (2) There shall be such other offices of Minister in the Government of
 the United Republic as the President may, from time to time, by instrument under the Public Seal establish.
 (3) The Vice-Presidents and the other Ministers shall be responsible
 under the direction of the President for such departments of State or other
 business of the Government as the President may assign to them.
 14. The President may appoint junior ministers to assist Ministers in
 the performance of their functions.
 15. (1) The President shall appoint the Ministers and the junior ministers from among the members of the National Assembly:
 Provided that the person appointed to be a Vice-President and leader of
 Government business in the National Assembly shall be appointed from
 among the constituency members of the National Assembly.
 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), if occasion arises
 for making an appointment of a Minister or a junior minister while Parliament is dissolved, the President may appoint a person who was a member
 of the National Assembly (or in the case of the Vice-President to whom
 the proviso to the previous subsection refers, a constituency member) immediately before such dissolution.
 16. The office of Minister, or of a junior minister, shall become vacant -
 (a) if the President removes the holder from office by instrument
 under the Public Seal; or
 (b) if the holder ceases to be a member of the National Assembly
 otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament; or
 (c) on the acceptance by the President of his resignation by the holder
 of the office; or
 (d) immediately before the assumption of office of a President.
 17. (1) There shall be a Cabinet consisting of the Ministers, and at the
 meetings of which the President, or in his absence a Minister appointed
 by the President, shall preside.
 (2) Subject to the powers of the President, the Cabinet shall be the
 principal instrument of policy and shall advise the President on such
 matters as may be referred to it under any general or special directions of
 the President.
 18. A Minister or a junior minister shall not enter upon the duties of his
 office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such
 oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Act of
 Parliament.
 
 932
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 19. There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet who shall have charge of
 the Cabinet Office, shall be responsible, in accordance with such instructions as may be given to him by the President, for arranging the business
 for, and keeping the minutes of, the Cabinet and for conveying the decisions
 of the Cabinet to the appropriate person or authority, and shall have such
 other functions as the President may from time to time direct.
 20. The President shall appoint a regional commissioner for every
 region within Tanganyika, and may suspend or remove from office any
 person so appointed.
 21. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of
 Parliament, the powers -
 (a) of constituting and abolishing offices in the service of the United
 Republic; and
 (b) of making appointments to such offices, and of promotion, termination of appointment, dismissal and disciplinary control of persons appointed to such offices, are vested in the President.
 22. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the President may -
 (a) grant to any person convicted of any offence a pardon, either free
 or subject to lawful conditions;
 (b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified
 period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person
 for any offence;
 (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment
 imposed on any person for any offence; and
 (d) remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any
 person for any offence or of any penalty or forfeiture otherwise due
 to the United Republic on account of any offence.
 (2) An Act of Parliament may make provision for regulating the manner
 in which the President shall exercise his functions under this section.
 (3) The provisions of this section shall apply to persons convicted and
 punished and punishments imposed in Zanzibar under a law of the Parliament of the United Republic or a law of Tanganyika which extends to
 Zanzibar, and to persons convicted and punished and punishments imposed in Tanganyika.
 Part 2. The Legislature of the United Republic
 COMPOSITION OF PARLIAMENT AND THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 23. There shall be a Parliament of the United Republic which shall
 consist of the President and the National Assembly.
 24. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the National Assembly
 shall consist of the following members: -
 
 Tanzania
 
 933
 
 
 (a) one hundred and seven constituency members;
 (b) fifteen members elected by the National Assembly in accordance
 with section 30 of this Constitution;
 (c) seventeen regional commissioners appointed for regions in Tanganyika and three regional commissioners appointed for regions in
 Zanzibar, by virtue of such offices;
 (d) such members (whose number shall not exceed thirty-two) as may,
 subject to section 31 of this Constitution, be appointed by the President from among the members of the Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar;
 (e) such members (whose numbers shall not exceed twenty) as may be
 appointed by the President in accordance with section 32 of this
 Constitution;
 (f) such members (whose number shall not exceed ten) as may be
 appointed by the President in accordance with section 33 of this
 Constitution.
 (2) The President shall not be a member of the National Assembly.
 (3) An Act of Parliament may -
 (a) alter the number of constituency members;
 (b) if the number of regions is other than seventeen in Tanganyika or
 three in Zanzibar, provide for a corresponding increase or decrease in
 the number of regional commissioners who shall be members of the
 National Assembly, or, in the event of an increase in the number of
 regions, provide for the selection of such members from among the
 regional commissioners,
 and any such Act shall have effect for the alteration of the provisions of
 subsection (1) of this section notwithstanding that the Bill for the Act is
 not supported in the manner prescribed by section 51 of this Constitution.
 CONSTITUENCY MEMBERS
 25. (1) Tanganyika shall be divided into as many constituencies as
 there are constituency members and each such constituency shall return
 one constituency member to the National Assembly.
 (2) The Electoral Commission, acting with the approval of the National
 Assembly signified by resolution, shall prescribe the boundaries of the
 constituencies, and the boundaries shall be such that the number of the
 inhabitants of each constituency is as nearly equal to the population quota
 as is reasonably practicable:
 Provided that the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be
 greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of means
 of communication, geographical features and the difference between urban
 and rural areas in respect of density of population.
 (8) The Electoral Commission shall review the division of Tanganyika
 
 934
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 into constituencies at intervals of not less than eight nor more than ten
 years and may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, alter the
 constituencies to such extent as it considers desirable in the light of the
 review:
 Provided that the Electoral Commission shall carry out such a review
 and, in accordance with the provisions of this section, alter the constituency members in the National Assembly; and, in addition, the Commission
 may at any time carry out such a review and, in accordance with the
 provisions of this section, alter the constituencies to such extent as it
 considers desirable in consequence of the holding of a census of the population in pursuance of any law.
 (4) Any provision by Parliament altering the number of constituency
 members in the National Assembly shall come into effect when the alteration of the constituencies that, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of this section, is consequential thereon, comes into effect; and
 any alteration of the constituencies shall come into effect upon the next
 dissolution of Parliament after the alteration has been approved by the
 National Assembly.
 (5) In this section, "the population quota" means the number obtained
 by dividing the number of inhabitants of Tanganyika by the number of
 constituencies into which Tanganyika is to be divided under this section.
 (6) For the purpose of this section, the number of inhabitants of Tanganyika shall be ascertained by reference to the latest census of the
 population held in pursuance of any law.
 26. (1) An election of a constituency member shall take place in every
 constituency after every dissolution of Parliament.
 (2) An election of a constituency member shall also take place in a
 constituency if the seat of the constituency member returned by the
 constituency falls vacant otherwise than on a dissolution of Parliament:
 Provided that no such election shall take place in a constituency during
 the period of six months immediately preceding the date of the dissolution
 of Parliament when such date has been proclaimed by the President or can
 be inferred from the provisions of subsection (3) or (4) of section 40 of this
 Constitution.
 27. (1) Any citizen of Tanzania who has attained the age of twenty-one
 years and is a member of the Party shall, unless he is disqualified under the
 following provisions of this section or an Act of Parliament to which this
 section refers, be qualified for election as a constituency member, and no
 other person shall be so qualified.
 (2) No person shall be qualified for election as a constituency member -
 (a) if he is under a declaration of allegiance to some country other
 than Tanzania;
 (b) if, under any law in force in Tanzania, he is adjudged or otherwise
 declared to be of unsound mind;
 
 Tanzania
 
 935
 
 
 (c) if -
 (i) he is under sentence of death imposed on him by any court in
 Tanzania or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding six months
 imposed on him by such a court; or
 (ii) he is detained under an order made under the Preventive
 Detention Act, 1962 and has been so detained under that order for
 a period exceeding six months; or
 (iii) he has been deported, in accordance with the provisions of
 section 2 of the Deportation Ordinance, under an order made under
 that section which has been in force for a period exceeding six
 months, and is still in force;
 (d) if he is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or
 otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Tanzania;
 (e) subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be prescribed
 by Act of Parliament, if he has any such interest in any such government contract as may be so prescribed;
 (f) subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be prescribed
 by Act of Parliament, if he holds or acts in any office or appointment
 in the service of the United Republic, other than an office to which
 the President is required to or may, by this Constitution, make appointments from members of the National Assembly, specified (either
 individually or by reference to a class of office or appointment) by
 Act of Parliament:
 Provided that a person otherwise qualified for election as a constituency member shall not be ineligible for primary nomination as a
 candidate for such election, and no objection to his nomination shall
 be allowed, solely by reason of his acting in or holding any office or
 appointment to which this paragraph refers at the time of such prima-
 ry nomination or during the period between his primary nomination
 and the approval of his candidature or his selection to contest the
 election, as the case may be, by the National Executive Committee of
 the Party in accordance with section 28 of this Constitution; or
 (g) if he is disqualified from registering as a voter for the purpose of
 elections to the National Assembly, or voting at any such election,
 under any Act of Parliament relating to offences connected with
 elections, whether to the National Assembly or otherwise.
 (3) No person shall be qualified for election as a constituency member
 at any general election at which he is a candidate for the office of President, or at any by-election while he holds the office of President.
 (4) An Act of Parliament may provide that a person who is the holder
 of or who acts in any office the functions of which involve responsibility
 for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election to the National
 Assembly or the compilation of any register of voters for the purposes of
 such an election shall not be qualified for election as a constituency member:
 
 936
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 Provided that nothing in any such Act shall disqualify the Speaker of
 the National Assembly for election as a constituency member or cause a
 person elected Speaker to vacate that office or his seat in the National
 Assembly.
 (5) An Act of Parliament may provide that a person shall not be
 qualified for election as a constituency member for such period (not exceeding five years) as may be prescribed by Parliament if he is convicted
 by any court of such offences connected with the election of members of
 the National Assembly as may be so prescribed.
 (6) An Act of Parliament may, in order to permit any person who has
 been adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, sentenced to death or
 imprisonment, adjudged or declared bankrupt or convicted of an offence
 prescribed under subsection (5) of this section to appeal against the decision in accordance with any law, provide that, subject to such conditions
 as may be thereby prescribed, the decision shall not have effect for the
 purposes of subsection (2) or subsection (5) of this section until such time
 as may be so prescribed.
 (7) For the purposes of paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of this section -
 (a) two or more sentences that are required to be served consecutively
 shall be regarded as separate sentences if none of them exceeds six
 months but if any of them exceeds six months they shall be regarded
 as one sentence; and
 (b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment imposed
 as an alternative to, or in default of, the payment of a fine.
 (8) In paragraph (e) of subsection (2) of this section, "government
 contract" means any contract made with the United Republic, or with a
 department of State, or with an officer of the United Republic contracting
 as such.
 28. (1) Constituency members shall be elected by the people in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and, subject thereto,
 the provisions of an Act of Parliament for regulating the election of constituency members to the National Assembly.
 (2) Candidates for an election in a constituency shall be required to
 be -
 (a) nominated at a primary nomination by not less than twenty-five
 persons registered in that constituency at the time of nomination as
 voters for the purposes of elections by the people; and
 (b) subsequent to such primary nomination, approved or, if more
 than two candidates are so nominated, selected by the National
 Executive Committee of the Party in accordance with the following
 provisions of this section.
 (3) Where less than three candidates are nominated at a primary nomination for an election in a constituency, the National Executive Committee
 shall, unless it is satisfied that the election procedure up to the time when
 
 Tanzania
 
 937
 
 
 its approval is sought (as prescribed by Act of Parliament and such rules
 of the Party as are not inconsistent therewith) has not been properly
 complied with, approve the candidate or, where there are two, both candidates for the purposes of this section.
 (4) Where more than two candidates are nominated at a primary nomination for an election in a constituency -
 (a) a meeting of the Annual District Conference of the Party for the
 district in which the constituency is situated shall be convened, and
 each member of that Conference present at the meeting may cast a
 preference by secret ballot for one of the persons so nominated; and
 (b) the names of the persons so nominated (together with a certificate
 declaring the number of votes accorded to each at such ballot) shall be
 submitted to the National Executive Committee by the Returning
 Officer, and that Committee shall, unless it is satisfied that the election
 procedure up to the time of such submission (as prescribed as afore-
 said) has not been properly complied with, select by secret ballot two
 persons so nominated as the candidates to contest the election in that
 constituency,
 and (unless the election is countermanded in accordance with any Act of
 Parliament in that behalf) the persons so elected shall be the candidates
 at that election in the constituency, and no other person shall be a candidate thereat.
 (5) In the exercise of its functions under this section, the National
 Executive Committee shall not -
 (a) in any case where two or more candidates have been nominated for
 election in a constituency, approve or select one candidate only for
 such constituency;
 (b) be bound to make any selection in accordance with the order of
 preference indicated by the votes of the members of a meeting of an
 Annual District Conference.
 29. Where any person who holds or acts in any office or appointment in
 the service of the United Republic to which paragraph (f) of subsection
 (2) of section 27 of this Constitution applies is approved or selected as a
 candidate for election by the National Executive Committee in accordance
 with section 28 of this Constitution, he shall be deemed to have resigned
 from such office or appointment immediately before such approval or
 selection, shall vacate such office forthwith, and shall be disqualified for
 appointment to or to act in that or any other such office or appointment
 before the declaration of the result of the election in the constituency
 concerned.
 
 938
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 Tanzania
 
 OTHER MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 30. (1) The President may, from time to time, designate any institution which, in his opinion, is an institution of a national character to be a
 national institution for the purposes of this section, and may revoke or
 amend any such designation.
 (2) Whenever -
 (a) Parliament is dissolved, every national institution may nominate
 not more than five persons;
 (b) a vacancy otherwise occurs among the number of the members of
 the National Assembly elected in accordance with this section, or such
 a vacancy is not filled, every national institution may nominate one
 person.
 who shall be qualified, in accordance with section 27 of this Constitution,
 for election as a constituency member of the National Assembly.
 (3) The names of the persons nominated in accordance with this section
 shall be submitted to the National Executive Committee of the Party and
 such as that Committee shall approve shall be presented to the National
 Assembly for election.
 (4) The National Assembly shall elect from among the persons so nominated and approved such number of members of the National Assembly as
 there are then vacancies from members elected under this section.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this section, an Act of Parliament may
 provide for the nomination and approval of persons for election by the
 National Assembly, and the election shall be regulated in accordance with
 the rules of the National Assembly.
 31. The power of the President to make appointments under paragraph
 (d) of subsection (1) of section 24 of this Constitution, and to revoke such
 appointments, shall be exercised, at all times when there is a President of
 Zanzibar in office, with the agreement of the President of Zanzibar.
 32. (1) In addition to members appointed under paragraph (d) of sub-
 section (1) of section 24 of this Constitution, the President may appoint not
 more than twenty persons who -
 (a) are qualified for election as constituency members of the National
 Assembly; and
 (b) are, immediately preceding such appointment, or were, immediately preceding the twenty-sixth day of April, 1964, ordinarily resident in Zanzibar,
 to be members of the National Assembly.
 (2) The power of the President to make appointments under this section, and to revoke such appointments shall be exercised, at all times when
 there is a President of Zanzibar in office, with the agreement of the President of Zanzibar.
 33. (1) In addition to the members appointed under paragraph (d) of
 
 939
 
 
 subsection (1) of section 24, or in accordance with section 32, of this Constitution, the President may appoint not more than ten persons qualified for
 appointment under this section to be members of the National Assembly.
 (2) No person shall be qualified for appointment in accordance with this
 section unless he is qualified for election as a constituency member in accordance with the provisions of section 27 of this Constitution other than
 those of paragraph (f) of subsection (2) of that section.
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS RELATING TO MEMBERS
 OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 34. Every member of the National Assembly shall, before taking his
 seat therein, take and subscribe before the National Assembly the oath of
 allegiance; but a member may before taking that oath take part in the
 election of a Speaker.
 35. (1) A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat there-
 in-
 (a) if such circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the
 National Assembly, he would not be qualified for election or, as the
 case may be, appointment as such under the provisions of this Constitution in accordance with which he was elected or appointed a member:
 Provided that a person appointed a member of the National Assembly in accordance with section 32 of this Constitution shall not
 vacate his seat in the National Assembly by reason only of the fact
 that, since his appointment, he has ceased to be ordinarily resident in
 Zanzibar; or
 (b) if he is elected President; or
 (c) in the case of a member other than a regional commissioner who
 holds his seat in accordance with paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of
 section 24 of this Constitution, if he is absent from the sittings of the
 National Assembly without the leave of the Speaker for three consecutive meetings of the Assembly; or
 (d) in the case of a member appointed by the President (and subject,
 in respect of those members to whom section 31 or 32 refer, to the
 respective provisions of those sections), if his appointment is revoked
 by the President,
 but, subject to this section and unless he sooner dies or resigns, shall hold
 his seat until Parliament is next dissolved.
 (2) An Act of Parliament may, in order to permit any member of the
 National Assembly who has been adjudged or declared to be of unsound
 mind, sentenced to death or imprisonment, adjudged or declared bankrupt or convicted of any offence prescribed under subsection (5) of section
 27 of this Constitution to appeal against the decision in accordance with
 
 940
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 any law, provide that, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by
 Parliament, the decision shall not have effect for the purposes of this
 section until such time as may be so prescribed.
 36. (1) The High Court of the United Republic shall have exclusive
 jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether -
 (a) any person has been validly elected or appointed as a member of
 the National Assembly; or
 (b) the seat in the National Assembly of a member thereof has be-
 come vacant:
 Provided that where the Electoral Commission, in the exercise of
 its powers under subsection (4) of section 7 of this Constitution, has
 declared any member of the National Assembly to have been elected
 President, the High Court shall not inquire further into any question
 in relation to the vacation of such member's seat.
 (2) An Act of Parliament may make provision with respect to -
 (a) the persons who may apply to the High Court for the determination of any question under this section;
 (b) the circumstances and manner in which and the conditions upon
 which any such application may be made; and
 (c) the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in relation
 to any such application.
 (3) The determination by the High Court of any question under this
 section shall not be subject to appeal.
 THE SPEAKER AND THE DEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 37. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be
 elected by the members of the National Assembly from among persons who
 are members of the National Assembly or who are qualified to be elected as
 constituency members of the Assembly.
 (2) A Minister, a junior minister or the holder of any other office pre-
 scribed by Act of Parliament for the purpose of this section shall not be
 qualified to be elected as Speaker.
 (3) The Speaker shall vacate his office -
 (a) if, having been elected from among the members of the National
 Assembly, he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly other-
 wise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament;
 (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would
 disqualify him for election as such;
 (c) subject to the provisions of subsection (5) of section 40 of this
 Constitution, when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution of Parliament; or
 (d) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the National Assembly supported by the votes of not less than two thirds of all the
 members thereof.
 
 Tanzania
 
 941
 
 
 (4) No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly (other
 than an election to the office of Speaker) at any time when the office of
 Speaker is vacant.
 (5) Any person elected to the office of Speaker who is not a member of
 the National Assembly shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
 take and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the National Assembly.
 38. (1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly who
 shall be elected by the members of the National Assembly from among
 persons who are members of the National Assembly other than Ministers,
 junior ministers or the holder of any other office prescribed by Act of
 Parliament for the purpose of this section.
 (2) The members of the National Assembly shall elect a person to the
 office of Deputy Speaker -
 (a) when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution of
 Parliament; and
 (b) at the first sitting of the National Assembly after the office of
 Deputy Speaker has become vacant otherwise than by reason of a
 dissolution of Parliament.
 or as soon thereafter as may be convenient.
 (3) The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office -
 (a) if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly;
 (b) if any other circumstances arise that, if he were not Deputy
 Speaker, would disqualify him for election as such; or
 (c) if he is removed from office by a resolution of the National Assembly.
 39. In any election of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, the votes of the
 members of the National Assembly shall be given by ballot in such manner
 as not to disclose how any particular member votes.
 MEETINGS AND PROCEEDINGS OF PARLIAMENT AND THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 40. (1) When Parliament has been dissolved, the President shall summon a new Parliament to meet within twenty-one days after the results
 have been declared in the general election following such dissolution in all
 the constituencies other than those in which the election has been counter-manded and commenced afresh.
 (2) The President may at any time dissolve Parliament.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section. Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date
 for which it is first summoned after any dissolution and shall then stand
 dissolved.
 (4) At any time when the United Republic is at war, Parliament may
 from time to time extend the period of five years specified in subsection
 (3) of this section for not more than twelve months at a time;
 
 942
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this
 subsection for more than five years.
 (5) If an emergency arises or exists which in the opinion of the President
 necessitates the summoning of a Parliament at a time when Parliament
 stands dissolved, and before the majority of results have been declared in
 the general election following the dissolution, he may, by Proclamation,
 summon Parliament and cause the Speaker and the persons who were the
 members of the National Assembly immediately before such dissolution to
 be summoned to such Parliament and, until midnight on the day on which
 such majority of results are declared, such persons shall be deemed to be
 the Speaker and members respectively of, and to constitute, the National
 Assembly.
 41. (1) Meetings of the National Assembly shall be held at such place as
 is customary for the holding of such meetings or at such other place in the
 United Republic as the President may appoint.
 (2) The first meeting of the National Assembly in a Parliament shall
 commence on the date for which Parliament is summoned, and each succeeding meeting shall commence on such date as the National Assembly
 shall appoint or as may be prescribed by the rules of procedure of the
 National Assembly:
 Provided that the President may at any time summon a meeting of the
 National Assembly.
 42. There shall preside at a sitting of the National Assembly -
 (a) the Speaker; or
 (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or
 (c) in the absence of the Speaker and of the Deputy Speaker, such
 member of the National Assembly (not being a Minister, a junior
 minister or the holder of any other office prescribed by Act of Parliament for the purpose of this section) as the National Assembly may
 elect for that purpose.
 43. If objection is taken by any member of the National Assembly
 present, that there are present in the National Assembly (besides the
 person presiding) less than one fourth of all the members of the National
 Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of
 procedure of the National Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that
 the number of persons present is, still less than one fourth of all the mem-
 bers of the National Assembly, he shall thereupon adjourn the National
 Assembly.
 44. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any question
 proposed for decision in the National Assembly shall be determined by a
 majority of the votes of the members present and voting.
 (2) The person presiding in the National Assembly shall cast a vote
 whenever there would otherwise be an equality of votes but shall not vote
 in any other case.
 
 Tanzania
 
 943
 
 
 (3) The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may make pro-
 vision under which a member who votes upon a question in which he has a
 direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted.
 45. (1) There shall be the following Standing Committees of the Nation-
 al Assembly: -
 (a) a Finance and Economic Committee;
 (b) a Political Affairs Committee;
 (c) a Public Accounts Committee;
 (d) a Social Services Committee;
 (e) a Standing Orders Committee; and
 (f) a General Purposes Committee;
 and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the composition and
 functions of such Committees shall be prescribed by the rules of procedure
 of the National Assembly.
 (2) The National Assembly may establish such other Committees of the
 Assembly as it thinks fit.
 46. The President may at any time address the National Assembly in
 person or by message which shall be read by a Minister.
 47. (1) The National Assembly may act notwithstanding any vacancy
 in its membership (including any vacancy not filled when the National
 Assembly first meets after a dissolution of Parliament) and the presence
 or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in
 the proceedings of the National Assembly shall not invalidate those proceedings.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may regulate its own procedure.
 48. Any person who sits or votes in the National Assembly knowing or
 having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not entitled to do so
 shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding four hundred shillings or such
 other sum as may be prescribed by Act of Parliament for each day on
 which he so sits or votes in the National Assembly, which shall be recoverable by action in the High Court at the suit of the Attorney-General.
 THE LEGISLATIVE POWER
 49. Legislative power with respect to all Union matters in and for the
 United Republic and with respect to all other matters in and for Tanganyika is vested in Parliament.
 50. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the legislative
 power of Parliament shall be exercised by Bills passed by the National
 Assembly and assented to by the President, and a Bill shall not become
 law unless it is so passed and assented to.
 (2) When a Bill is presented to the President for assent, he shall either
 assent to the Bill or withhold his assent and return the Bill to the National
 
 944
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 Assembly with a message stating the reasons why he has withheld his
 assent.
 (3) A Bill returned to the National Assembly under this section shall not
 be presented to the President for his assent a second time within six months
 of its being so returned unless it is supported in the National Assembly at
 the last stage before it is again presented by the votes of not less than two-
 thirds of all the members of the Assembly.
 (4) When a Bill which has been returned to the National Assembly and
 has thereafter been supported in the National Assembly, in the manner
 specified in subsection (3) of this section, by the votes of not less than two
 thirds of all the members of the Assembly, is presented to the President for
 assent a second time within six months of its being so returned, the President shall, unless he has first dissolved Parliament, assent to the Bill within
 twenty-one days of its presentation.
 (5) Nothing in this section or in section 49 of this Constitution shall
 prevent an Act of Parliament from conferring on any person or authority
 the power to make provisions having the force of law or from conferring
 the force of law on any provision made by any person or authority.
 51. (1) An Act of Parliament may alter any of the provisions of this
 Constitution, but, save as provided in section 24 of this Constitution, a Bill
 for an Act to alter any provisions of this Constitution or any of the pro-
 visions of the laws set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution shall
 not be passed by the National Assembly unless it is supported by the votes
 of not less than two thirds of all the members of the Assembly at not less
 than two of its stages in the Assembly.
 (2) In this section references to the alteration of any provision of this
 Constitution or of a law set out in the Second Schedule include references
 to the amendment, modification or re-enactment, with or without amendment or modification, of that provision, the suspension or repeal of that
 provision and the making of different provision in lieu of that provision,
 otherwise than where this Constitution expressly provides that an Act of
 Parliament may make different provision.
 52. Except upon the recommendation of the President signified by a
 Minister, the National Assembly shall not -
 (a) proceed upon any Bill (including any amendment to a Bill) that
 in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the
 following purposes: -
 (i) for the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation
 otherwise than by reduction;
 (ii) for the imposition of any charge upon the Consolidated Fund
 or any other public fund or the alteration of any such charge
 otherwise than by reduction;
 (iii) for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated
 Fund or any other public fund of any moneys not charged thereon'
 
 Tanzania
 
 945
 
 
 or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal;
 or
 (iv) for the composition or remission of any debt due to the United
 Republic; or
 (b) proceed upon any Motion (including any amendment to a Motion)
 the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to
 make provision for any of those purposes:
 Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a Bill or any
 amendment to a Bill introduced by, or a Motion or an amendment to a
 Motion moved by, a Minister or junior minister.
 CHAPTER IV
 THE EXECUTIVE AND LEGISLATURE
 FOR ZANZIBAR
 53. (1) There shall be an Executive and a Legislature for Zanzibar.
 (2) The head of the Executive for Zanzibar shall be the Vice-President
 of the United Republic appointed for that purpose, and he shall be styled
 the President of Zanzibar:
 Provided that where the office of such Vice-President is vacated, in ac-
 cordance with paragraph (d) of section 16 of this Constitution, immediately
 before the assumption of office of a President of the United Republic, the
 person who held the office of such Vice-President shall not thereupon cease
 to be head of the Executive for Zanzibar, but he shall continue as head of
 such Executive until a new appointment is made of such a Vice-President
 of the United Republic.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Executive and Legis-
 lature for Zanzibar shall be constituted in accordance with the law in force
 in Zanzibar immediately before the commencement of this Constitution
 which relates to the Executive and Legislative authorities of Zanzibar;
 and the constitution of the said Executive and Legislature may be varied
 from time to time in accordance with the provisions of any such law.
 54. (1) Executive power with respect to all matters in and for Zanzibar
 other than Union matters is vested in the Executive for Zanzibar.
 (2) Legislative power with respect to all matters in and for Zanzibar
 other than Union matters is vested in the Legislature for Zanzibar.
 55. Subject to any law in force in Zanzibar regulating the power of ap-
 pointment, regional commissioners may be appointed for regions in Zanzi-
 bar, and the persons so appointed may be suspended or removed from
 office in the exercise of the executive power in and for Zanzibar.
 
 946
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 CHAPTER V
 THE JUDICATURE OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC
 AND OF ZANZIBAR
 Part 1. The High Court of the United Republic
 56. (1) There shall be a High Court of the United Republic which shall
 have such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this
 Constitution or any other law.
 (2) The judges of the High Court of the United Republic shall be the
 Chief Justice of Tanzania and such number of other judges, not being less
 than eight (hereinafter referred to as "the puisne judges") as may be
 prescribed by Parliament:
 Provided that the office of a puisne judge shall not be abolished while
 there is a substantive holder thereof.
 (3) The High Court shall be a superior court of record and, save as
 otherwise provided by Act of Parliament, shall have all the powers of such
 a court.
 57. (1) The Chief Justice of Tanzania shall be appointed by the President.
 (2) The puisne judges of the High Court of the United Republic shall be
 appointed by the President after consultation with the Chief Justice.
 (3) (a) Subject to the provisions of subsection (4), a person shall not be
 qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court unless -
 (i) he is, or has been, a judge of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth, or in any country outside the Commonwealth that may be prescribed by Act of Parliament, or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court; or
 (ii) he holds one of the specified qualifications and has held one or other of those qualifications for a total period of not less than five years.
 (b) In this subsection and in subsections (4) and (6) "the specified qualifications" means the professional qualifications specified by the Advocates Ordinance (or by or under any law amending or replacing that Ordinance) one of which must be held by any person before he may apply under that Ordinance (or under any such law) to be admitted as an advocate in Tanganyika.
 (4) Where the President is satisfied that by reason of special circumstances a person who holds one of the specified qualifications is worthy, capable and suitable to be appointed a judge of the High Court notwithstanding that he has not held some one or other of those qualifications for a total period of not less than five years, the President may dispense with the requirement that such person shall have held some one or other of the specified qualifications for a total period of not less than five years, and may, after such consultation aforesaid, appoint him a judge of the High Court.
 (5) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant or if the Chief Justice is for any
 reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then until a person
 has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until
 the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case
 may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the puisne judges
 as may be designated in that behalf by the President.
 (6) If the office of any puisne judge is vacant or if any such judge is
 appointed to act as Chief Justice or is for any reason unable to perform the
 functions of his office, or if the Chief Justice advises the President that the
 state of business in the High Court so requires, the President may appoint
 a person qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court to act as a
 puisne judge of that Court:
 Provided that -
 (a) notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of section 58 of
 this Constitution, no person shall be disqualified for appointment
 under this subsection by reason only of his age;
 (b) the President may dispense with the requirement that a person
 shall not be qualified for an appointment as a judge of the High Court
 unless he has held some one or other of the specified qualifications for
 a total period of not less than five years in the case of an appointment
 of a person who has one of the specified qualifications to act as a puisne
 judge of the High Court for the like reasons as he may dispense with
 that requirement under the provisions of subsection (4).
 (7) Any person appointed under subsection (6) of this section to act as a
 puisne judge shall continue to act for the period of his appointment or,
 if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the
 President:
 Provided that, notwithstanding the expiration of the period of his ap-
 pointment or the revocation of his appointment, he may thereafter conti-
 nue to act as a puisne judge for so long as may be necessary to enable him
 to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that
 were commenced before him previously thereto.
 58. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the
 office of a judge of the High Court shall vacate that office on attaining the
 age of sixty-two years:
 Provided that the President may permit such a person to continue in
 office until he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
 (2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at which he is required
 by the provisions of this section to vacate his office, a person holding the
 office of a judge of the High Court may continue in office for so long after
 
 948
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 attaining that age as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment
 or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced
 before him before he attained that age.
 (3) A judge of the High Court may be removed from office only for
 inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from in-
 firmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for misbehavior, and
 shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of sub-
 section (5) of this section.
 (4) If the President considers that the question of removing a judge
 under this section ought to be investigated, then -
 (a) he shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a chairman and
 not less than two other members, the chairman and at least one half
 of the other members being persons who hold or have held office as
 judges of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal
 matters in some part of the Commonwealth, or in any country outside
 the Commonwealth that may be prescribed by Parliament, or a court
 having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court;
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts
 thereof to the President and advise the President whether the judge
 ought to be removed from office under this section for inability as
 aforesaid or for misbehavior.
 (5) Where a tribunal appointed under subsection (4) advises the President that a judge ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid
 or misbehavior, the President shall remove such judge from office.
 (6) If the question of removing a judge from office has been referred to a
 tribunal under subsection (4) of this section, the President may suspend
 the judge from performing the functions of his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall in any case
 cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President that the judge
 ought not to be removed from office.
 (7) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the pro-
 visions of subsection (7) of section 57 of this Constitution.
 59. A judge of the High Court shall not enter upon the duties of his
 office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such
 oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Act of
 Parliament.
 Part 2. Appointment of other Judicial Officers in Tanganyika
 and the Judicial Service Commission
 60. (1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission in and for the
 United Republic in Tanganyika which shall consist of -
 (a) the Chief Justice of Tanzania, who shall be Chairman;
 (b) such puisne judge of the High Court of the United Republic as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the President after
 consultation with the Chief Justice;
 (c) a member appointed by the President.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed under the provisions
 of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of this section if he is a member of the
 National Assembly or the holder of an office prescribed by Parliament for
 the purpose of this section.
 61. (1) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the power -
 (a) to appoint persons to hold offices to which this section applies
 (including the power of confirming appointments and promotions) is
 vested in the President;
 (b) to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in
 such offices, to terminate appointments and to remove such persons
 from office, is vested in the Judicial Service Commission.
 (2) The offices to which this section applies are the offices of Registrar
 and Deputy Registrar of the High Court of the United Republic, Resident
 Magistrate and any other magistrate, and such other offices connected
 with any court (other than a court-martial) as, subject to the provisions of
 this Constitution, may be prescribed by Act of Parliament:
 Provided that this section shall not apply to any such office or magistrate
 of a court in Zanzibar.
 (3) The power of the President to abolish offices in the service of the
 United Republic shall not be exercised in respect of any office to which this
 section applies while there is a substantive holder of that office, unless the
 Judicial Service Commission concurs in such abolition.
 Part 3. The High Court of Zanzibar
 62. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as precluding the con-
 tinuance or establishment under and in accordance with the law of Zanzi-
 bar of a High Court in and for Zanzibar or courts subordinate thereto.
 63. (1) Subject to sections 36 and 64 of this Constitution, the High
 Court of Zanzibar shall have such jurisdiction as may be conferred on a
 High Court by or under any law in force in, including a law extended to,
 Zanzibar.
 (2) Subject to this Constitution and to any express provision of an Act
 of Parliament, where jurisdiction is conferred on a High Court by a law of
 the Parliament of the United Republic which applies to, or a law in force in
 Tanganyika which is extended to Zanzibar, the jurisdiction of the High
 Court of Zanzibar shall be concurrent with that of the High Court of the
 United Republic.
 
 950
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 Part 4. Interpretation of the Interim Constitution and Appeals
 64. (1) An appeal shall lie as of right direct to a full bench of the High
 Court of the United Republic from final decisions of any court or judge in
 Tanzania on questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution, and a
 decision of a full bench of the High Court on any such question shall be
 final and no appeal shall lie therefrom to any other court.
 (2) An Act of Parliament may make provision -
 (a) regulating appeals to a full bench of the High Court;
 (b) for the reservation or reference to a full bench of the High Court of
 questions as to the interpretation of this Constitution.
 (3) In this section a full bench of the High Court means a court com-
 posed of not less than five judges of the High Court of the United Republic.
 65. (1) The appropriate legislative authority may make provision for
 appeals to lie from decisions of a High Court or of a magistrate to another
 court in East Africa in cases other than questions as to the interpretation
 of this Constitution.
 (2) The provisions of this section shall be subject to the provisions of
 section 36 of this Constitution.
 (3) The appropriate legislative authority may make provision regulating
 the circumstances and manner in which, and the conditions on which,
 appeals under this section shall be prosecuted.
 Part 5. Process of the Courts
 66. (1) The criminal and civil process (including warrants of arrest) of
 the courts of the United Republic and of Zanzibar may be served and
 executed in any place within the limits of Tanzania.
 Provided that -
 (a) the service or execution of any process outside the local limits of
 the court by which the process was issued shall be effected in the like
 manner and subject to the like conditions as is the service and execution of the process of the courts having local and comparable jurisdiction at the place where the service or execution of such first-mentioned process is to be effected; and
 (b) if any law in force in the place where the service or execution of
 process is to be effected requires that the process of courts which are
 not courts having local jurisdiction shall be endorsed or otherwise
 authenticated by a court or magistrate having local jurisdiction, the
 process of the former courts shall, before being served or executed, be
 so endorsed or otherwise authenticated.
 (2) Subject to any law in force in the place where any arrest is made,
 where any person has been arrested in one part of Tanzania in pursuance of
 any process issued in some other part, such person may be removed in
 custody to the court by which such process was issued.
 
 Tanzania
 
 951
 
 
 (3) Nothing in this section shall prejudice, or preclude the making of any
 provision for giving effect to the process, or enabling effect to be given to
 the process, of the courts of the United Republic or of Zanzibar outside
 the limits of Tanzania.
 CHAPTER VI
 THE PERMANENT COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY
 67. (1) There shall be a Permanent Commission of Enquiry which shall
 have jurisdiction to enquire into the conduct of any person to whom this
 section applies in the exercise of his office or authority, or in abuse thereof.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Permanent Commission
 shall make an enquiry into the conduct of any such person aforesaid
 whenever so directed by the President, and may, unless the President
 otherwise directs, make such enquiry in any case in which it considers that
 an allegation of misconduct or abuse of office or authority by any such
 person ought to be investigated.
 (3) The Permanent Commission shall report the proceedings of every
 enquiry, and of its conclusions and recommendations thereon, to the President.
 (4) This section applies to persons in the service of the United Republic,
 persons holding office in the Party, the members and persons in the service
 of a local government authority and the members and persons in the service of such Commissions, corporate bodies established by statute and
 public authorities or boards, as may be specified by Act of Parliament, but
 does not apply to the President or the head of the Executive for Zanzibar.
 (5) Nothing in this section or in any Act of Parliament enacted for the
 purpose of this Chapter shall confer on the Permanent Tribunal any power
 to question or review any decision of any judge, magistrate or registrar in
 the exercise of his judicial functions or any decision of a tribunal establish-
 ed by law for the performance of judicial functions in the exercise of such
 functions.
 68. (1) The Permanent Commission shall comprise a chairman and two
 other members who shall be appointed by the President.
 (2) A person appointed a member of the Permanent Commission shall
 forthwith vacate any office of Minister or junior minister, any office pre-
 scribed by Act of Parliament for the purpose of this section and any office
 in the Party.
 (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (3) of section 83 of
 this Constitution, a person shall not be qualified to be reappointed a mem-
 ber of the Permanent Commission within two years of his last ceasing to
 hold such office.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this section, the office of a member of
 the Permanent Commission shall become vacant -
 
 952
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 (a) at the expiration of two years from the date of his appointment:
 Provided that one of the first members of the Permanent Commis-
 sion, other than the chairman, shall vacate his office at the expiration
 of one year from the date of his appointment and, if no provision in
 that behalf is made in the instrument of appointment of one of such
 members, the member who shall so vacate his office shall be deter-
 mined by lot; or
 (b) if he accepts any office of a kind which he would be required to
 vacate on his being appointed a member of the Permanent Commis-
 sion.
 (5) A member of the Permanent Commission may be removed from office
 by the President only for inability to discharge the functions of his office
 (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause)
 or for misbehavior.
 (6) The Permanent Commission may act notwithstanding any vacancy
 or the absence of any member.
 69. Subject to this Constitution, the powers and immunities of the
 Permanent Commission for the discharge of its functions, and its procedure,
 shall be prescribed and regulated by Act of Parliament.
 CHAPTER VII
 FINANCIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO
 THE UNITED REPUBLIC
 70. No taxation shall be imposed otherwise than by or under the au-
 thority of an Act of Parliament or by or under the authority of a provision
 upon which Parliament has conferred the force of law:
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as restricting
 any power of the Legislature for Zanzibar to impose any tax within the
 imits of its competence.
 71. All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purpose of
 the United Republic (not being revenues or other moneys payable by or
 under any law for some other purpose or into some other fund established
 for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form one Consolidated Fund.
 72. (1) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of
 the United Republic except -
 (a) to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this
 Constitution or by any other law; or
 (b) where the issue of those moneys has been authorized by an Ap-
 propriation Act or by an Act enacted in pursuance of section 75 of this
 Constitution.
 (2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund of the United
 Republic other than the Consolidated Fund unless the issue of those
 moneys has been authorized by or under any law.
 
 953
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 (3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund unless
 such withdrawal has been approved by the Controller and Auditor
 General and except in the manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament.
 73. (1) The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before the
 National Assembly in each financial year estimates of the revenue and
 expenditure of the United Republic for the next following financial year.
 (2) When the estimates of expenditure (other than expenditure charged
 upon the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or by any other law)
 have been approved by the National Assembly, a Bill, to be known as an
 Appropriation Bill, shall be introduced into the National Assembly pro-
 viding for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to
 meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums, under sepa-
 rate votes for the several services required, for the purposes specified
 therein.
 (3) If in respect of any financial year it is found -
 (a) that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act for any
 purpose is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a
 purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or
 (b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose in excess of
 the amount appropriated for that purpose by the Appropriation Act
 or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that
 Act.
 a supplementary estimate or, as the case may be, a statement of excess
 showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National Assembly and, when the supplementary estimate or the statement of excess
 has been approved, a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced
 into the National Assembly, providing for the issue of such sums from the
 Consolidated Fund and appropriating them for the purposes specified
 therein.
 74. An Act of Parliament may make provision under which, if the
 Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year has not come into
 operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may
 authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the
 purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the
 Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that
 financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act,
 whichever is the earlier.
 75. (1) An Act of Parliament may make provision -
 (a) for the establishment of a Contingencies Fund and for authorizing
 the President or a Minister appointed by him, if satisfied that there
 has arisen an urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which
 no other provision exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet
 that need; and
 (b) for authorizing the President or a Minister appointed by him, if
 
 954
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 satisfied as aforesaid, to apply sums voted for other purposes to meet
 such need.
 (2) Where any advance is made from the Contingencies Fund or money
 voted for one purpose is applied in pursuance of such authority aforesaid,
 a supplementary estimate shall be presented for approval by the National
 Assembly and the Supplementary Appropriation Bill introduced on the
 approval thereof shall, where money is advanced from the Contingencies
 Fund, make provision for replacing the amount so advanced.
 76. (1) The public debt of the United Republic shall be secured on the
 Consolidated Fund of the United Republic.
 (2) For the purposes of this section, the public debt includes the interest
 on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt and the costs,
 charges and expenses incidental to the management of that debt.
 77. (1) There shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this
 section applies such salary and such allowances as may be prescribed by
 Act of Parliament.
 (2) The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of the offices
 to which this section applies, and where any such holder is appointed on
 terms by which he is entitled to a pension or gratuity, such pension or
 gratuity shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of the United Re-
 public.
 (3) The salary payable to the holder of any office to which this section
 applies and his terms of office, other than allowances, shall not be altered
 to his disadvantage after his appointment.
 (4) Where a person's salary or terms of office depend upon his option,
 the salary or terms for which he opts shall, for the purpose of subsection
 (3) of this section, be deemed to be more advantageous to him than any
 others for which he might have opted.
 (5) This section applies to the offices of judge of the High Court of the
 United Republic, of chairman and member of the Permanent Commission,
 and of Controller and Auditor-General of the United Republic.
 78. (1) There shall be a Controller and Auditor-General of the United
 Republic.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Controller and Auditor-General -
 (a) to satisfy himself that any proposed withdrawal from the Con-
 solidated Fund is authorized by, or as provided by, section 72 of this
 Constitution, and, if so satisfied, to approve such withdrawal;
 (b) to satisfy himself that all moneys that are charged on the Con-
 solidated Fund or have been appropriated by Act of Parliament, and
 disbursed, have been applied to the purposes for which they were so
 charged or appropriated and that the expenditure conforms to the
 authority that governs it; and
 (c) at least once in every year to audit and report on the public
 accounts of the United Republic, the accounts of all officers and authorities of the Government of the United Republic, the accounts
 of all courts of the United Republic (other than courts no part of the
 expenses of which are paid directly out of moneys provided by Parliament) and the accounts of the Clerk of the National Assembly.
 (3) The Controller and Auditor-General and any officer authorized by
 him shall have access to all books, records, returns, reports and other
 documents relating to any of the accounts referred to in subsection (2) of
 this section.
 (4) The Controller and Auditor-General shall submit every report made
 by him in pursuance of subsection (2) of this section to the President who
 shall, not later than seven days after the first sitting of the National Assembly next after the receipt of such a report, cause it to be laid before the
 National Assembly; and if the President makes default in laying the report
 before the National Assembly, the Controller and Auditor-General shall
 submit the report to the Speaker of the National Assembly (or, if the
 office of Speaker is vacant or if the Speaker is for any reason unable to
 perform the functions of his office, to the Deputy Speaker) who shall cause
 it to be laid before the National Assembly.
 (5) The Controller and Auditor-General shall perform such other duties
 and exercise such other powers in relation to the public accounts of the
 United Republic or the accounts of other public authorities or other bodies
 as may be prescribed by or under any law.
 (6) In the exercise of his functions under subsections (2), (3) and (4) of
 this section, the Controller and Auditor-General shall not be subject to the
 direction or control of any other person or authority:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as precluding
 a court from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether
 the Controller and Auditor-General has performed those functions in accordance with this Constitution.
 79. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a person holding the
 office of Controller and Auditor-General of the United Republic shall
 vacate that office when he attains the age of sixty years or such other age
 as may be prescribed by Act of Parliament.
 (2) A person holding the office of Controller and Auditor-General may
 be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions of his
 office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause)
 or for misbehaviour and shall not be so removed except in accordance with
 the provisions of subsection (4) of this section.
 (3) If the President considers that the question of removing the Controller and Auditor-General under this section ought to be investigated, then-
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a
 chairman and not less than two other members, the chairman and at
 least one half of the other members being persons who hold or have
 held office as judges of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil
  and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth, or in any
 country outside the Commonwealth that may be prescribed by Parliament, or a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court;
 and
 (b) that tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts
 thereof to the President and recommend to him whether the Controller
 and Auditor-General ought to be removed under this section for inability as aforesaid or misbehavior.
 (4) Where a tribunal appointed under subsection (3) advises the President that the Controller and Auditor-General ought to be removed from
 office for inability as aforesaid or misbehavior, the President shall remove
 him from office.
 (5) If the question of removing the Controller and Auditor-General has
 been referred to a tribunal under this section, the President may suspend
 the Controller and Auditor-General from performing the functions of his
 office and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends
 to the President that the Controller and Auditor-General should not be
 removed.
 (6) A person who holds or has held the office of Controller and Auditor-
 General shall not be eligible for appointment to or to act in any other
 office in the service of the United Republic.
 (7) Nothing in this section shall apply to any person appointed to act
 in the office of Controller and Auditor-General.
 CHAPTER VIII
 THE ARMED FORCES
 80. No person shall raise or maintain any military, naval or air forces
 in Tanzania except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 81. (1) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the powers
 of the President as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United
 Republic shall include the power to order any such forces to engage in
 operations for the defence of the United Republic, for the preservation of
 public order, for relief in cases of emergency and for any other purposes,
 whether within or outside Tanzania, appearing to the Commander-in-Chief
 to be expedient.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, the power to
 commission officers in the Armed Forces of the United Republic, to terminate the appointment of and dismiss any member of such Armed Forces
 and to appoint members of the Armed Forces to command and, the power
 to order a member of the Armed Forces not to exercise any authority
 conferred on him as such, is vested in the Commander-in-Chief.
 
 Tanzania
 
 957
 
 
 (3) A purported exercise of any authority in contravention of any such
 order as aforesaid shall be void.
 CHAPTER IX
 MISCELLANEOUS
 82. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission for the United Republic
 which shall consist of -
 (a) the Speaker of the National Assembly, who shall be chairman; and
 (b) not less than three nor more than five appointed members who
 shall be appointed by the President.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified to be an appointed member of the
 Commission if he is a Minister, a junior minister, the holder of any office
 prescribed by Parliament for the purpose of this section, a member of the
 National Assembly or the holder of any office (other than the office of
 Clerk or Clerk-Assistant of the National Assembly) specified by Act of
 Parliament under the provisions of paragraph (f) of subsection (2) of section 27 of this Constitution.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this section, the office of an appointed
 member of the Electoral Commission shall become vacant -
 (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his appointment; or
 (b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the
 Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as
 such.
 (4) An appointed member of the Electoral Commission may be removed
 from office by the President only for inability to discharge the functions of
 his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any
 other cause) or for misbehavior.
 (5) The Electoral Commission may act notwithstanding any vacancy or
 the absence of any member:
 Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof.
 (6) An Act of Parliament may provide for the appointment by the
 Electoral Commission of delegates for the supervision of elections of constituency members of the National Assembly and, subject to any such Act of
 Parliament and the directions of the Electoral Commission, the functions
 of the Electoral Commission for the supervision of such elections may be
 exercised by such delegates.
 (7) In the exercise of its functions the Electoral Commission shall not
 be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.
 (8) The question whether the Electoral Commission has validly per-
 formed any function vested in it by this Constitution shall not be inquired
 into by any court.
 
 958
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 83. (1) Any person who is appointed, elected or otherwise selected to
 any office established by this Constitution (including the office of Minister
 or junior minister or of a member of the National Assembly other than a
 member thereof who holds his seat by virtue of his tenure of some other
 office) may resign from that office by writing under his hand addressed to
 the person or authority by whom he was appointed, elected or selected:
 Provided that -
 (a) in the case of a person who holds office as President, his resignation
 from that office shall be addressed to the Chief Justice of Tanzania;
 (b) in the case of a person who holds office as Speaker or Deputy
 Speaker of the National Assembly, his resignation from that office
 shall be addressed to the National Assembly; and
 (c) in the case of a member of the National Assembly, his resignation
 from that Assembly shall be addressed to the Speaker.
 (2) The resignation of any person from any such office as aforesaid
 shall take effect when the writing signifying the resignation is received by
 the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by any person authorized
 by that person or authority to receive it, unless it is stated in such writing
 that it is to take effect at a later date in which case it shall take effect at
 such later date.
 (3) Where any person has vacated any office established by this Constitution (including the office of Minister or junior minister or of such member
 of the National Assembly aforesaid), he may, if qualified, again be appointed, elected or otherwise selected to hold that office in accordance with
 the provisions of this Constitution:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent a person who
 holds office as President from being re-elected to that office during his
 tenure thereof.
 84. (1) The powers conferred by this Constitution to make appointments to offices in the service of the United Republic shall include the
 power to appoint persons to act in or to perform the functions of such
 offices:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to any Minister,
 junior minister, judge of the High Court, or member of the Permanent
 Commission or the Electoral Commission.
 (2) Where a power is conferred by this Constitution -
 (a) upon any person or authority to make any appointment to any
 office, a person may be appointed to that office, notwithstanding that
 some other person may be holding that office, when that other person
 is on leave of absence pending the relinquishment of the office; and
 where two or more persons are holding the same office by reasons of
 an appointment made in pursuance of this paragraph, then, for the
 purposes of any function conferred on the holder of that office, the
 person last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder of that
 office;
 
 Tanzania
 
 959
 
 
 (b) upon any person or authority to appoint any person to act in or
 perform the functions of any office if the holder thereof is himself
 unable to perform those functions, no such appointment shall be
 called in question on the ground that the holder of the office was not
 unable to perform those functions.
 85. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires -
 "appropriate legislative authority" means Parliament or the Legislature
 for Zanzibar according of their respective powers;
 "Chief Justice" means the Chief Justice of Tanzania or, in the absence
 or inability to act of the Chief Justice and of any person appointed to act
 for him, the senior puisne judge who is present and able to act;
 "the Commonwealth" means the United Republic, any country to which
 section 7 of the Citizenship Act, 1961, applies and any dependency of any
 such country;
 "the constitution of the Party" means the constitution set out in the
 First Schedule to this Constitution, as amended from time to time as provided in subsection (4) of section 3;
 "elections by the People" means an election of a President and an
 election of a constituency member of the National Assembly;
 "law" includes any provision that has the force of law;
 "Minister" includes a Vice-President but does not include a junior
 mister;
 "oath" includes affirmation;
 "oath of allegiance" means such oath of allegiance to the United Republic as may be prescribed by Act of Parliament;
 "office in the service of the United Republic" includes membership of
 the Armed Forces of the United Republic and of a police force established
 by law;
 "the Party", except when used in the expression "the constitution of the
 Party", means the one political Party provided for in section 3 and, until
 the union of the Tanganyika African National Union with the Afro-
 Shirazi Party, means, in and for Tanganyika, the Tanganyika African
 National Union and, in and for Zanzibar, the Afro-Shirazi Party:
 Provided that, until such union -
 (a) "the Party" where it first occurs in subsection (3) of section 7,
 means a joint meeting of the Tanganyika African National Union and
 the Afro-Shirazi Party; and
 (b) "the Party" where it last occurs in subsection (3) of section 7,
 means either the Tanganyika African National Union or the Afro-
 Shirazi Party;
 "Tanganyika" means the territories formerly comprising the Republic
 of Tanganyika, and the waters thereof;
 "Union matters" means matters relating to -
 (i) this Constitution and the government of the United Republic;
 
 960
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 (ii) External Affairs;
 (iii) Defence;
 (iv) Police;
 (v) Emergency Powers;
 (vi) Citizenship;
 (vii) Immigration;
 (viii) External trade and borrowing;
 (ix) the Public Service of the United Republic;
 (x) Income Tax, corporation tax, customs and excise duties;
 (xi) Harbors, civil aviation, posts and telegraphs;
 (xii) Currency, coinage and legal tender (including paper money);
 banks (including savings banks) and banking; foreign exchange and
 exchange control;
 "Zanzibar" means the territories formerly comprising the People's Re-
 public of Zanzibar, and the waters thereof.
 (2) In this Constitution, references -
 to the functions of the office of President shall be construed as references
 to his powers and duties in the exercise of the executive power of the
 United Republic and to any other powers and duties conferred or imposed
 on the President by this Constitution or by any other law;
 to persons holding offices or to organs of State are, unless otherwise
 specified, references to offices in the service of the United Republic and
 organs of the United Republic.
 (3) Where this Constitution requires any matter or thing to be done by
 an organ of the Party, that matter or thing shall be done, subject to this
 Constitution and any Act of Parliament in that behalf, in accordance with
 the constitution of the Party and any rules of the Party applicable thereto.
 (4) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered as holding an office in the service of the United Republic by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in
 respect of service under the United Republic or any former Government of
 Tanganyika, or in the armed or police forces of the United Republic or any
 former Government of Tanganyika or Zanzibar.
 (5) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, a reference to the holder of an office by the term designating his office shall be
 construed as including a reference to any person for the time being lawfully acting in or performing the functions of that office.
 (6) References in this Constitution to the power to remove the holder of
 an office in the service of the United Republic from his office shall be
 construed as including references to any power conferred by any law to
 require or permit that officer to retire from the service of the United Re-
 public:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as conferring
 on any person or authority power to require a judge of the High Court of
 the Controller and Auditor-General to retire from his office.
 
 Tanzania
 
 961
 
 
 (7) Any reference in this Constitution to a law that amends or replaces
 any other law shall be construed as including a reference to a law that
 modifies, re-enacts, with or without amendment or modification, or makes
 different provision in lieu of that other law.
 86. (1) This Act may be cited as the Interim Constitution of Tanzania,
 1965, and shall extend to and in respect of Zanzibar as well as to and in
 respect of Tanganyika.
 (2) This Act shall come into operation immediately after the dissolution
 of the present Parliament.
 FIRST SCHEDULE
 CONSTITUTION
 OF
 TANGANYIKA AFRICAN NATIONAL UNION
 ARTICLE I
 1. The name of the organization is the Tanganyika African National
 Union (hereinafter to be referred to as TANU or, interchangeably the
 Party).
 2. The Head Office of TANU shall be at Dar es Salaam.
 ARTICLE II. PREAMBLE
 Whereas TANU believes:
 (a) That all human beings are equal;
 (b) That every individual has a right to dignity and respect;
 (c) That every citizen is an integral part of the Nation and has the
 right to take an equal part in Government at local, regional and
 national level;
 (d) That every citizen has the right to freedom of expression, of movement, of religious belief and of association within the context of the law;
 (e) That every individual has the right to receive from society protection of his life and of property held according to law;
 (f) That every individual has the right to receive a just return for his labor;
 (g) That all citizens together possess all the natural resources of the country in trust for their descendants;
 (h) That in order to ensure economic justice the State must have effective control over the principal means of production; and
 (i) That it is the responsibility of the State to intervene actively in the economic life of the Nation so as to ensure the well-being of all citizens and so as to prevent the exploitation of one person by another or one group by another, and so as to prevent the accumulation of wealth to an extent which is inconsistent with the existence of a
 classless society;
 Now, therefore, the principal aims and objects of TANU shall be as
 follows:
 (a) To consolidate and maintain the independence of this country and
 the freedom of its people;
 (b) To safeguard the inherent dignity of the individual in accordance
 with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
 (c) To ensure that this country shall be governed by a democratic
 socialist government of the people;
 (d) To co-operate with all political parties in Africa engaged in the
 liberation of all Africa;
 (e) To see that the Government mobilizes all the resources of this
 country towards the elimination of poverty, ignorance and disease;
 (f) To see that the Government actively assists in the formation and
 maintenance of co-operative organizations;
 (g) To see that wherever possible the Government itself directly participates in the economic development of this country;
 (h) To see that the Government gives equal opportunity to all men and women irrespective of race, religion or status;
 (i) To see that the Government eradicates all types of exploitation, intimidation, discrimination, bribery and corruption;
 (j) To see that the Government exercises effective control over the principal means of production and pursues policies which facilitate the way to collective ownership of the resources of this country;
 (k) To see that the Government co-operates with other States in Africa in bringing about African Unity;
 (1) To see that the Government works tirelessly towards world peace and security through the United Nations Organization.

 ARTICLE III. MEMBERSHIP
 A. Individual Membership
 (1) Membership of TANU shall be open to all citizens of this country  who accept the beliefs, aims and objects as set out in Article II and who, in addition, are of the age of 18 years or above.
 (2) A person wishing to become a member of TANU shall make his application on TANU's application form and submit it to the Secretary of the Branch of TANU of the area in which he ordinarily resides.
 (3) Upon admission to membership he shall pay an entrance fee of Shs. 2/- to TANU and a receipt shall be given therefor. In addition he shall pay a monthly subscription of 50 cents on or before the last day of each month, provided that a member may pay a lump sum of Shs. 6/- by  way of subscription for a period of 12 months in advance, or such sum for
 such period as may be agreed by the Branch Executive Committee.
 (4) Membership of TANU may be lost through
 (a) resignation;
 (b) expulsion under Article IV E. 2 (6).
 (5) In the case of resignation no refund of entrance fee or subscription
 shall be made.
 (6) In the case of expulsion no refund of entrance fee shall be made; refund may, however, be made of a sum of money paid by way of subscription in respect of any unexpired period.
 B. Affiliate Membership
 (1) Affiliate membership of TANU shall be open to any bona fide organization which accept the beliefs, aims and objects of TANU as set out in Article II.
 (2) Any organization wishing to become an affiliate member of TANU shall apply in writing enclosing a resolution to that effect of the competent organ of that organization to the Secretary-General of TANU
 (3) The Secretary-General of TANU shall place the application before the National Executive Committee of TANU which shall decide whether to grant membership or not.
 (4) Upon admission to membership the organization shall pay an entrance fee of Shs. 200/-.
 (5) An affiliate organization may be called upon by TANU to make such financial contribution towards the funds of the Party as may be agreed between TANU and that organization.
 (6) Affiliate membership may be lost through
 (a) withdrawal by that organization;
 (b) expulsion under Article IV E. 2 (6).
 (7) No affiliate organization may withdraw from TANU unless it has
 given notice to that effect six months in advance. No refund of fee shall be
 made upon withdrawal or upon expulsion.
 (8) The following organizations are hereby declared to be affiliate members of TANU:
 National Union of Tanganyika Workers (N.U.T.A.).
 Co-operative Union of Tanganyika (C.U.T.).
 Tanganyika African Parents' Association (T.A.P.A.).
 
 
 ARTICLE IV. ORGANS OF TANU
 A. The Cell
 (1) The basic organ of TANU shall be the cell.
 (2) A cell shall consist of ten houses grouped together for the purpose.
 All TANU members living in those ten houses shall comprise a cell.
 (3) Each cell shall elect a Leader who will take overall charge of the
 affairs of the Party in that cell and who will be its delegate to the Branch
 Annual Conference.
 B. Branch Organs
 1. There shall be the following organs of TANU at the branch level:
 Branch Annual Conference.
 Branch Executive Committee.
 2. Branch Annual Conference.
 (1) There shall be a Branch Annual Conference for each Branch of
 TANU Its composition shall be as follows:
 (a) The Branch Chairman;
 (b) The Branch Secretary;
 (c) All members of the Annual District Conference in that Branch;
 (d) All Cell Leaders;
 (e) All Local Government Councillors in that Branch;
 (f) One representative from each of the following sections of TANU
 in that Branch:
 Women's Section.
 TANU Youth League.
 Elders Section.
 (2) The Branch Annual Conference shall elect the Branch Chairman.
 (3) It shall elect delegates to the Annual District Conference.
 (4) It shall elect 6 delegates to sit on the Branch Executive Committee.
 (5) It shall be competent to discuss such matters of local interest as it
 may deem fit and may make recommendations thereon to the Annual
 District Conference.
 (6) It shall consider and adopt the report on the activities of the Party
 within the Branch submitted to it by the Branch Secretary.
 (7) It may form such sub-committees as it may deem necessary for the
 better carrying out of the activities of the Party.
 (8) It shall meet in ordinary session once a year or whenever there is
 convened a meeting of the Annual District Conference.
 (9) The Branch Chairman, or in his absence any other person elected
 for the purpose, shall preside over the meetings of the Conference.
 (10) The quorum of its meeting shall be at least half the members entitled to attend, one of whom must either be the Chairman or the Branch
 Secretary.
 3. Branch Executive Committee.
 (1) There shall be a Branch Executive Committee in each Branch. Its
 composition shall be as follows:
 (a) The Branch Chairman;
 (b) The Branch Secretary;
 (c) Six delegates elected by the Branch Annual Conference;
 (d) All delegates from the Branch to the Annual District Conference;
 (e) One representative from each of the following sections of TANU
 in the Branch:
 Women's Section.
 TANU Youth League.
 Elders Section.
 (2) The Branch Executive Committee shall be responsible for the carrying out of the decisions of the National Conference, the National Executive Committee, the Regional Conference, the Annual District Conference and the Branch Annual Conference in so far as they concern that Branch.
 (3) It shall generally supervise and coordinate the activities of the Party within the Branch and shall report thereon to the Branch Annual Conference.
 (4) It may appoint such sub-committees as may be necessary for the better carrying out of the functions and activities of the Party within the Branch.
 (5) It shall meet in ordinary session once a month.
 (6) The Branch Chairman, or in his absence any other person elected
 for the purpose, shall preside over the meetings of the Committee.
 (7) The quorum of its meeting shall be at least half the members entitled to attend.
 Officers of the Branch
 There shall be the following officers at the local level: -
 The Branch Chairman;
 The Branch Secretary.
 1. Chairman.
 (i) The Chairman shall be elected by the Annual Conference of the
 Branch and shall hold office for a term of two years provided that he
 shall be eligible for re-election;
 (ii) He shall take overall charge of the affairs of the Party in the
 Branch;
 (iii) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the Central
 Committee may determine;
 2. Branch Secretary.

 (i) The Branch Secretary shall be appointed by the Central Commit-
 tee;
 (ii) He shall be the chief executive officer of the Branch;
 (iii) He shall convene all the meetings of Branch Annual Conference
 and the Branch Executive Committee;
 (iv) He may be paid such salary and allowance (if any) as the Central
 Committee may determine.
 C. District Organs
 1. There shall be the following organs of TANU at the District level:
 Annual District Conference.
 District Executive Committee.
 District Working Committee.
 2. Annual District Conference.
 (1) There shall be an Annual Conference for each District. Its composition shall be as follows: -
 (a) The District Chairman;
 (b) The District Secretary;
 (c) All members of the Regional Executive Committee resident in that
 District;
 (d) Members of the District Working Committee appointed by the
 District Chairman;
 (e) All members of the Regional Conference resident in that District;
 (f) All Members of Parliament representing constituencies in that
 District;
 (g) Two delegates elected by each Branch in that District;
 (h) All Chairmen of the Branches in that District;
 (i) All Branch Secretaries;
 (j) A delegate from each of the affiliate organizations in that District;
 (k) One representative from each of the following sections in the
 District: -
 Women's Section.
 TANU Youth League.
 Elders Section.
 Categories (d) and (i) of members shall have no vote.
 (2) The Annual District Conference shall be competent to discuss matters of district interest and may make recommendations thereon to the
 Regional Conference or through its delegates to the National Conference.
 (3) It shall consider and adopt the report on the activities of the Party
 within the District submitted ot it by the District Executive Committee.
 (4) It shall elect ten delegates to the District Executive Committee.
 (5) It shall elect two delegates to the National Conference.
 (6) It shall elect the District Chairman.
 (7) It shall consider all names of candidates for Parliamentary elections
 and local government elections in accordance with the provisions of the
 electoral law and local government law in force.
 (8) It shall meet in ordinary session once a year. It may however meet
 at any time if so instructed by the Central Committee.
 (9) The District Chairman, or in his absence any other person elected
 for the purpose, shall preside over its meetings.
 (10) Voting at meetings of the Conference shall be by simple majority
 For the purpose of electing the Chairman, considering names of candidates
 for Parliamentary election, and local government election, voting shall be
 by secret ballot.
 (11) The quorum of the Conference shall be at least half of the members
 entitled to attend, provided that where the Conference is meeting for the
 purpose of considering names of candidates for Parliamentary and local
 government election the quorum shall be at least two thirds of the mem-
 bers entitled to attend.
 3. District Executive Committee.
 (1) There shall be a District Executive Committee for each District.
 Its composition shall be as follows: -
 (a) The District Chairman;
 (b) The District Secretary;
 (c) All members of the Regional Executive Committee resident in
 that District;
 (d) All Members of Parliament representing Constituencies in that
 District;
 (e) Members of the District Working Committee appointed by the
 District Chairman;
 (f) Ten delegates elected by the Annual District Conference;
 (g) A delegate from each of the affiliate organizations: -
 (h) A representative from each of the following sections in the
 District: -
 Women's Section.
 TANU Youth League.
 Elders Section.
 Category (e) shall have no vote.
 (2) The District Executive Committee shall be responsible for the carry-
 ing out of the decisions of the National Conference, the National Executive
 Committee and the Regional Conference as far as that District is concerned.
 (3) It shall generally supervise and coordinate the activities of the
 Party in the District and shall report thereon to the Annual Conference.
 (4) It may appoint such sub-committees as may be necessary for the
 better carrying out of the policies and activities of the Party in that
 District.
 (5) It shall meet in ordinary session once every three months. It shall
 however meet in extraordinary session if so instructed by the Central
 Committee.
 (6) The District Chairman, or in his absence any other person elected
 for the purpose, shall preside over its meetings.
 (7) The quorum of its meetings shall be at least half the members entitled
 to attend, one of whom must be either the Chairman or the District
 Secretary.
 4. District Working Committee.
 (1) There shall be a District Working Committee for each District. Its
 composition shall be as follows:
 (a) The District Chairman;
 (b) The District Secretary;
 (c) Up to four persons appointed by the Chairman.
 (2) The District Working Committee shall be the organ concerned with
 the supervision of the day to day administration of the affairs of the Party
 in the District.
 (3) It shall approve all items of expenditure in that District and shall
 authorize all payments out of monies raised in that District.
 (4) It shall meet at least once every two weeks.
 (5) The District Chairman or in his absence the District Secretary shall
 preside over its meetings.
 (6) A quorum of its meetings shall be at least half its members.
 Officers of the District
 There shall be the following officers at the District level:
 The District Chairman.
 The District Secretary.
 1. Chairman.
 (i) The Chairman shall be elected by the Annual District Conference
 and shall hold office for a term of two years provided that he shall be
 eligible for re-election.
 (ii) He shall take overall charge of the Party in the District.
 (iii) He shall, in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Ordinance, also be the Chairman of any City Council, Municipal
 Council, Town Council or District Council in that District.
 (iv) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the
 Central Committee may determine.
 2. District Secretary.
 (i) The District Secretary shall be appointed by the President of the
 United Republic.
 (ii) He shall be the chief executive officer of the Party in the District
 and shall be responsible to the District Executive Committee for the
 day to day administration of the affairs of the Party.
 (iii) He shall be responsible for convening all meetings of the District
 Executive Committee and the District Working Committee.
 (iv) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the Central
 Committee may determine.
 D. Regional Organs
 1. There shall be the following organs of TANU at the Regional level:
 Regional Conference.
 Regional Executive Committee.
 Regional Working Committee.
 2. Regional Conference.
 (1) There shall be a Regional Conference for each administrative Region.
 Its composition shall be as follows: -
 (a) The Regional Chairman;
 (b) The Regional Secretary;
 (c) Members of the Regional Executive Committee;
 (d) Members of the Regional Working Committee appointed by the
 Regional Chairman;
 (e) Five delegates elected from each District;
 (f) All District Chairmen in the Region;
 (g) All District Secretaries in the Region;
 (h) All members of the National Executive Committee resident in the
 Region;
 (i) All Members of Parliament representing Constituencies in the
 Region;
 (j) A delegate from each of the affiliate organizations;
 (k) A representative from each of the following sections of the Party
 in the Region: -
 Women's Section.
 TANU Youth League.
 Elders Section.
 Category (d) shall have no vote.
 (2) The Regional Conference shall elect the Regional Chairman.
 (3) It shall be competent to discuss matters of Regional interest and
 may make recommendations thereon to the National Conference.
 (4) It shall consider and adopt the report on the activities of the Party
 within the Region submitted to it by the Regional Executive Committee.
 (5) It shall meet in ordinary session once every two years and shall do
 so immediately before the meeting of the National Conference. It shall meet in extraordinary session if so instructed by the Central Committee.
 (6) The Regional Chairman, or in his absence any other person elected
 for the purpose, shall preside over all its meetings.
 (7) A quorum of its meeting shall be at least half the members entitled to
 attend, one of whom must be either the Regional Chairman or the Regional
 Secretary.
 3. Regional Executive Committee.
 (1) There shall be a Regional Executive Committee for each Region. Its
 composition shall be as follows: -
 (a) The Regional Chairman;
 (b) The Regional Secretary;
 (c) All members of the National Executive Committee resident in the
 Region;
 (d) Members of the Regional Working Committee appointed by the
 Regional Chairman;
 (e) All District Chairmen in the Region;
 (f) All District Secretaries in the Region;
 (g) All Members of Parliament representing Constituencies in the
 Region;
 (h) One delegate from each District elected by the Regional Confer-
 ence;
 (i) One delegate from each of the affiliate organizations;
 (j) One representative from each of the following sections: -
 Women's Section.
 TANU Youth League.
 Elders Section.
 Categories (d) and (f) shall have no vote.
 (2) The Regional Executive Committee shall be responsible for the carry-
 ing out of the decisions of the National Conference and the National Exe-
 cutive Committee as far as that Region is concerned, and also those of the
 Regional Conference.
 (3) It shall be responsible to the Regional Conference.
 (4) It shall generally supervise and coordinate the activities of the
 Party in the Region and shall report thereon to the Regional Conference.
 (5) It may appoint such sub-committees as may be necessary for the
 better carrying out of the policies and activities of the Party in that
 Region.
 (6) It shall meet in ordinary session once every three months.
 (7) The Regional Chairman, or in his absence any other person elected
 for the purpose, shall preside over the meetings of the Committee.
 (8) The quorum of its meeting shall be at least half the members entitled
 to attend.
 
 Tanzania
 
 971
 
 
 4. Regional Working Committee.
 (1) There shall be a Regional Working Committee for each Region. Its
 composition shall be as follows: -
 (a) The Regional Chairman;
 (b) The Regional Secretary;
 (c) Up to four persons appointed by the Regional Chairman.
 (2) The Regional Working Committee shall be the organ concerned with
 the supervision of the day to day administration of the affairs of the Party
 in the Region.
 (3) It shall meet at least once every two weeks.
 (4) The Regional Chairman or in his absence the Regional Secretary
 shall preside over its meetings.
 (5) A quorum of its meetings shall be at least half the members.
 General Officers of the Region
 There shall be the following general officers at the Regional level:
 The Regional Chairman.
 The Regional Secretary.
 In addition, the Central Committee may appoint such other officers as
 it may deem necessary for the better carrying out of the Party activities
 and functions.
 1. Chairman.
 (i) The Chairman shall be elected by the Regional Conference and
 shall hold office for a term of two years provided that he shall be
 eligible for re-election.
 (ii) He shall take overall charge of the Party in the Region.
 (iii) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as may be
 determined by the Central Committee.
 2. Regional Secretary.
 (i) The Regional Secretary shall be appointed by the President of the
 United Republic.
 (ii) He shall be the chief executive officer of the Party in the Region
 and shall be responsible to the Regional Executive Committee for the
 day to day administration of the affairs of the Party.
 (iii) He shall be responsible for convening all meetings of the Regional
 Conference, the Regional Executive Committee and the Regional
 Working Committee.
 (iv) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the Central
 Committee may determine.
 
 972
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 E. National Organs
 1. There shall be the following organs of TANU at the National level:
 National Conference.
 Electoral Conference.
 National Executive Committee.
 Central Committee.
 Disciplinary Committee.
 Cabinet.
 2. National Conference.
 (1) The National Conference shall be composed of: -
 (a) The President, the Vice-President, the Secretary-General and the
 National Treasurer;
 (b) Two elected delegates from each District;
 (c) All Members of Parliament or, if Parliament has been dissolved, all
 those persons who were Members of Parliament immediately before
 dissolution;
 (d) All Regional Chairmen of TANU;
 (e) All District Chairmen of TANU;
 (f) All District Secretaries of TANU;
 (g) Members of the Central Committee appointed by the President;
 (h) Members of the National Executive Committee elected by the
 National Conference;
 (i) A delegate from each of the affiliate organizations of TANU
 Categories (f) and (g) shall have no vote.
 Category (c): Only TANU members shall have the vote.
 (2) The National Conference shall be the supreme organ of TANU
 and shall be responsible for formulating the general policy of TANU and
 shall generally superintend the activities of TANU To this end it may
 form such Committees as it may deem fit.
 (3) It shall elect the President and the Vice-President of the Party.
 (4) It shall elect 17 persons to sit on the National Executive Committee.
 (5) It shall have the power to confirm, amend, repudiate or revoke any
 decision made by any other organ of the Party or by any officer of the
 Party.
 (6) It shall have the power to expel any member or any affiliate organization from the Party. To this end it may make regulations governing
 expulsion.
 (7) Subject to paragraph 3 it shall have the power to amend this Constitution by a two-thirds majority of all those entitled to vote.
 (8) It shall meet in ordinary session once every two years: provided that
 it may at any time meet in extraordinary session if so summoned by the
 President of the Party or at the request of at least two thirds of the Members of the National Assembly and two thirds of the members of the
 National Executive Committee.
 (9) Notice of the date of meeting of the National Conference shall be
 given at least three months in advance. Shorter notice may, however, be
 given for an extraordinary meeting of the National Conference.
 (10) The Chairman of the National Conference shall be the President of
 the Party or in his absence the Vice-President or such other person as may
 be specifically elected by the Conference for the purpose.
 (11) The quorum of the National Conference shall be half the number of
 all those entitled to attend.
 (12) Subject to sub-paragraph (7), all decisions of the National Confer-
 ence shall be by a simple majority of those present and voting provided:
 that for the election of President and Vice-President voting shall be by
 secret ballot and the simple majority shall be that of all members entitled
 to vote.
 (13) The National Conference may, without prejudice to its own power
 to exercise the same functions, delegate any of its functions to any other
 organ of the Party.
 (14) The functions of delegates elected by the National Conference to
 the National Executive Committee shall consist in the general supervision
 of the implementation of the decisions of the National Conference.
 3. Electoral Conference.
 (1) An Electoral Conference shall be held whenever a Presidential election is contemplated.
 (2) The Electoral Conference shall be composed of: -
 (a) All those entitled to attend the National Conference of TANU;
 (b) Delegates from the Afro-Shirazi Party.
 (3) The Secretary-General of TANU shall, in conjunction with the
 Secretary-General of the Afro-Shirazi Party, fix the date of the Conference;
 provided that such date shall not be later than 21 days before the date
 appointed for the Presidential election.
 (4) The sole function of the Conference shall be to select the name of the
 candidate for election to the office of President of the United Republic.
 (5) The composition of the Conference shall not be changed except by
 agreement of both TANU and the Afro-Shirazi Party.
 4. National Executive Committee.
 (1) There shall be a National Executive Committee of TANU
 (2) The National Executive Committee shall be the chief executive
 organ of the Party and shall be directly answerable to the National Conference.
 (3) The composition of the National Executive Committee shall be as
 follows: -
 
 Tanzania
 
 974
 
 
 (a) The President, the Vice-President, the Secretary-General and the
 National Treasurer of TANU;
 (b) Members of the Central Committee of TANU appointed by the
 President;
 (c) Seventeen delegates elected by the National Conference;
 (d) The Secretary-General of the National Union of Tanganyika
 Workers;
 (e) The Secretary-General of the Co-operative Union of Tanganyika;
 (f) All Regional Chairmen of TANU;
 (g) All Regional Secretaries of TANU;
 (h) A delegate from each of the affiliate organizations;
 (i) Two delegates from the TANU Youth League;
 (j) The Principal Secretary to the President of the United Republic
 provided he is a member of TANU;
 (k) The Attorney General or the Solicitor-General provided he is a
 member of TANU
 Categories (b), (g), (j) and (k) shall have no vote.
 (4) The functions of the National Executive Committee shall be as
 follows: -
 (a) To elect the Secretary-General, and the National Treasurer of the
 Party;
 (b) To appoint auditors of the Party;
 (c) To consider names of candidates for Parliamentary election;
 (d) To consider names of candidates for Parliamentary election submitted to it by certain organizations designated for the purpose by
 the President of the United Republic;
 (e) To consider the annual statement of income and expenditure for
 the previous year and the report of the auditors thereon;
 (f) To consider the estimates of expenditure for the current year;
 (g) To consider the general report submitted to it by the Secretary-
 General of the Party;
 (h) To consider reports submitted to it annually by all the organizations affiliated to the Party;
 (i) To draw up a program of activities of the Party in pursuance
 of the decisions of the National Conference;
 (j) To consider such matters as are required to be submitted for
 consideration by the National Conference;
 (k) To maintain watch over the activities of members of the Party
 and where satisfied that a member is clearly conducting himself in a
 manner inconsistent with his membership of the Party to report such
 member to the National Conference.
 (5) The National Executive Committee may appoint such Committee or
 Committees as it may deem necessary for the better exercise of its functions.
 (6) It shall meet in ordinary session once every three months. It shall
 meet in extraordinary session if summoned by the President of the Party
 or at the request of at least half of its members.
 (7) Meetings of the National Executive Committee shall ordinarily be
 held in Dar es Salaam: provided that the Central Committee of TANU
 may direct the holding of a meeting in a place other than Dar es Salaam.
 (8) Notice of the date and place of meeting shall be given by the Secretary-General at least two weeks in advance.
 (9) All meetings of the National Executive Committee shall be presided
 over by the President of the Party or in his absence by the Vice-President
 of the Party or in his absence by any other person elected by the National
 Executive Committee for the purpose.
 (10) Its quorum shall be at least half of the members entitled to attend.
 (11) Voting at all meetings shall be by simple majority of those present
 and voting except that for the election of the Secretary-General, and the
 National Treasurer a simple majority of all voting members shall be
 required.
 5. Central Committee.
 (1) There shall be a Central Committee of TANU
 (2) Its composition shall be as follows: -
 (a) The President;
 (b) The Vice-President;
 (c) The Secretary-General;
 (d) The National Treasurer;
 (e) Such persons as may be appointed by the President.
 (3) The Central Committee shall be the organ concerned with the day to
 day administration of the affairs of the Party and shall be responsible to
 the National Executive Committee.
 (4) It shall have the power to appoint and remove from office all the
 officers of the Party other than those listed in paragraph (2) above or
 those appointed by the President of the United Republic. For this purpose
 it may establish a Service Commission that shall exercise such functions
 on its behalf.
 (5) It may establish such specialized departments of the Headquarters
 as may be necessary for the better fulfillment of the aims and objects and
 general functions of the Party.
 (6) It may raise a levy for special purposes.
 (7) It shall have the power to consider names of candidates for local
 government election; provided that it may delegate this power to the
 Annual District Conference.
 (8) It shall meet at least once a month.
 (9) The President of the Party, or in his absence the Vice-President,
 shall preside over all its meetings.
 (10) Its quorum shall be at least half its members, one of whom must
 be either the President or the Vice-President of the Party.
 6. Disciplinary Committee.
 (1) There shall be a Disciplinary Committee of TANU
 (2) It shall be composed of three persons elected by the National Conference for a term of two years.
 (3) It shall investigate all allegations of improper conduct made against
 members of the Party and shall report thereon to the National Executive
 Committee.
 7. Cabinet.
 (1) There shall be a Cabinet of the Party. Its composition shall be as
 follows: -
 (a) The President;
 (b) The Vice-President;
 (c) The Secretary-General;
 (d) The National Treasurer.
 (2) It shall have the power in an emergency to spend up to Shs. 20,000/-
 for any purpose: provided that it shall be required to make a full report
 thereon to the meeting of the National Executive Committee next follow-
 ing.
 (3) The President or in his absence the Vice-President of the Party shall
 be required to sign a certificate certifying the emergency nature of the
 occasion.
 Elected National Officers of the Party
 The following shall be the elected National officers of the Party: -
 The President.
 The Vice-President.
 The Secretary-General.
 The National Treasurer.
 1. President.
 (i) The President of the Party shall be the Leader of the Party and
 shall also be its Chief Spokesman;
 (ii) He shall be elected by the National Conference of the Party. He
 shall hold office for a term of five years provided that he shall be
 eligible for re-election;
 (iii) He may be removed from office by resolution of the National
 Conference supported by at least two thirds of all voting members
 of the National Conference;
 (iv) He shall be answerable to the National Conference for the general
 direction of the policy of the Party;
 
 977
 
 Tanzania
 
 
 (v) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the National
 Executive Committee may determine.
 2. Vice-President.
 (i) The Vice-President shall be elected by the National Conference.
 He shall hold office for a term of two years provided that he shall be
 eligible for re-election.
 (ii) He may be removed from office by resolution of the National
 Conference supported by at least two thirds of all voting members of
 the National Conference.
 (iii) He shall be the principal assistant to the President in the dis-
 charge of the functions of the Party.
 (iv) He shall perform such functions of the Party as may be assigned
 to him by the President.
 (v) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the National
 Executive Committee may determine.
 3. Secretary-General.
 (i) The Secretary-General of the Party shall be elected by the National
 Executive Committee. He shall hold office for a term of two years
 provided that he shall be eligible for re-election.
 (ii) He may be removed from office by resolution of the National
 Executive Committee supported by at least two thirds of all voting
 members of the National Executive Committee.
 (iii) He shall be the Party's chief executive officer and shall be responsible for the day to day administration of the Party. He shall
 attend all meetings of the National Conference, the National Executive Committee and the Central Committee. He shall record the
 business and generally carry out the policy of the Party and the
 instructions of the National Conference, the National Executive Committee and the Central Committee. He shall also be responsible to the
 President for the overall supervision of the Party.
 (iv) He shall, in addition to the above, perform such functions as the
 President may from time to time assign to him.
 (v) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the National
 Executive Committee may determine.
 4. National Treasurer.
 (i) The National Treasurer of the Party shall be elected by the Nation-
 al Executive Committee. He shall hold office for a term of two years
 provided that he shall be eligible for re-election.
 (ii) He may be removed from office by resolution of the National
 Executive Committee supported by at least two thirds of all voting
 members of the National Executive Committee.
 
 Tanzania
 
 978
 
 
 (iii) He shall keep and maintain the accounts of the Party and make
 such payments as the Central Committee may approve. Subject to
 Standing Orders that may be made by the National Executive Committee he shall ensure that all monies that are received are regularly
 paid into the Party banking accounts. He shall keep and produce such
 books, vouchers and documents as may be required by the National
 Executive Committee and the Central Committee. He shall prepare
 and present to the National Executive Committee at the end of each
 financial year appropriate accounts of income and expenditure of the
 Party during the period under review and shall give such assistance
 to the auditors of the Party as they shall require. He shall be responsible to the National Executive Committee for all monies passing
 through his hands. He shall be responsible for keeping the Head-
 quarters' cash book and other books of account, the handling of petty
 cash and the making of payments on behalf of the Party, and for
 keeping copies of all receipts and expenditure. He shall prepare all
 cheques and payment vouchers. All cheques must be signed by at
 least one Trustee and any two signatories out of a panel of five signatories appointed by the CentralCommittee.
 (iv) He may be paid such salary and allowances (if any) as the National Executive Committee may determine.
 ARTICLE V. MISCELLANEOUS
 A. Sections of the Party
 1. There shall be the following sections of the Party: -
 TANU Youth League Section.
 Women's Section.
 Elders' Section.
 2. TANU Youth League Section.
 (1) The Youth League Section shall be open to any citizen who sub-
 scribes to the beliefs, aims and objects of TANU and whose age is
 between six and thirty-five years.
 (2) It may make rules governing its modus operandi; provided that such
 rules shall require to be approved in advance by the National Executive
 Committee.
 3. Women's Section.
 (1) There shall be a Women's Section to which all TANU women shall
 belong.
 (2) It may make rules governing its modus operandi; provided that such
 rules shall require to be approved in advance by the National Executive
 Committee.
 
 Tanzania
 
 979
 
 
 4. Elders' Section.
 (1) There shall be an Elders' Section of TANU to which all TANU
 elders shall belong.
 (2) It may make rules governing its modus operandi; provided that such
 rules shall require to be approved in advance by the National Executive
 Committee.
 B. Quorum
 Unless otherwise specifically stated in this Constitution the quorum for
 all TANU organs shall be at least half the members entitled to attend
 and vote at the meetings of the organ in question.
 C. Casual Vacancies
 Whenever there is a vacancy in any of the offices of the Party the appointing or electing organ shall be required to fill the vacancy without
 delay; provided that nothing in this provision shall necessitate the convening of an extraordinary meeting of the National Conference for the sole
 purpose of electing a delegate or delegates to the National Executive
 Committee.
 D. Board of Trustees
 1. Constitution of the Board of Trustees.
 (1) There shall be a Board of Trustees of TANU (hereinafter referred
 to as "the Board"). It shall consist of the following members who shall be
 ordinarily resident in Tanzania: -
 (a) Four Trustees in the following persons holding the offices for the
 time being of President, Vice-President, Secretary-General and
 National Treasurer of TANU; and
 (b) Not less than two nor more than five persons elected by the
 National Conference for a term of two years provided that they shall
 be eligible for re-election;
 (c) No person shall be eligible for election unless he is a fully paid-up
 member of the Party.
 (2) Trustees appointed by virtue of their office as above-mentioned
 shall be Trustees only during the tenure of their office.
 (3) A Trustee shall, unless he dies or resigns or he sooner vacates office
 in accordance with this Constitution, hold office until the conclusion of
 the next National Conference held after he assumed the duties of his office.
 (4) The President and Vice-President of TANU shall be the Chair-
 man and Vice-Chairman respectively of the Board.
 (5) In the absence of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman the Trustees

 present at the meeting shall elect a Chairman for the purpose of conduct-
 ing the business of that meeting only.
 (6) All decisions of the Board shall be taken by a majority of the
 Trustees present at the meeting. In the event of an equality of votes the
 Chairman at the meeting shall have a casting vote in addition to his
 deliberative vote.
 (7) The quorum of the Board's meeting shall be at least five Trustees.
 2. Functions of the Board of Trustees.
 (1) All immovable property of TANU and such other property as the
 Central Committee may direct shall vest in the Board.
 (2) The Board shall have all the powers of trustees under the law.
 (3) The Board may engage in such business activities as may further
 the beliefs, aims and objects of the Party and for this purpose may form
 such bodies as it may deem desirable.
 (4) The Mwananchi Development Corporation Limited, a private limited
 liability company, is hereby declared to be a body formed for the purpose
 of paragraph (3) above.
 E. Members' Pledges
 We TANU members have tried to play our part always remembering
 that our strength lies in our unity and steadfastness. We try to be humble.
 Our actions are motivated by our determination to do the greatest good to
 the greatest number. We desire to form a Government that is just and fair
 to all. It is in the light of this background that all members of TANU
 make the pledges enumerated here below.
 All members of TANU shall be required to repeat before an officer of
 the Party the following pledges: -
 (i) I believe in the universal brotherhood of man and in the Unity of
 Africa.
 (ii) I shall faithfully serve my country and its people.
 (iii) I shall apply all my efforts towards the elimination of poverty,
 disease, ignorance and corruption.
 (iv) Corruption perverts justice; I shall neither offer nor accept bribes.
 (v) I shall never use my official position nor that of another person
 for my personal gain or private benefit.
 (vi) I shall make available to the people of this country all my
 knowledge and skill, which I shall constantly strive to advance.
 (vii) I shall actively take part in the building of the Nation.
 (viii) I shall always tell the truth and shall never bear any grudges
 against anybody.
 (ix) I shall be a faithful member of TANU and a good citizen of
 Tanzania and Africa.
 
 Tanzania
 
 98 1
 
 
 (x) I shall be loyal to the President of the United Republic of Tanzania.
 SECOND SCHEDULE (Section 51)
 ENTRENCHED PROVISIONS
 The Republic of Tanganyika (Consequential,
 Transitional and Temporary Provisions)
 Act, 1962........... . .             . . Sections 3, 17, 18, 23 and 26.
 The Civil Service Act, 1962 ....  ...   Sections 22, 23 and 24.
 The Judicial Service Act, 1962 . . . . . . Sections 22, 23 and 24.
 The Citizenship Act, 1961 . .......     The whole Act.
 The Acts of Union of Tanganyika and
 Zanzibar....... . . . .         . . . . The whole Act and law.
 BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Hopkins, R. F. Political roles in a new state: Tanzania's first decade. New Haven 1971.
 Kimambo, I. M. and Temu, A. J. eds. A history of Tanzania. Dar es Salaam: East
 African Publishing House 1970.
 Lofchie, M. F. Zanzibar, background to revolution. Princeton University Press, 1965.
 Maguire, G. A. Toward Uhuru in Tanzania. Cambridge University Press, London, 1969.
 Potholm, Christian P. Four African Political Systems. Prentice Hall, 1971.
 Urfer, Sylvian. Ugamaa, espoir du socialisme africain en Tanzanie. Paris, Aubier-
 Montaigne, 1971.
 
 982
 
 Tanzania
 
 
</pre>
