<pre>
 Ethiopia
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of
 ETHIOPIA'
 November 4, 1955
 On the twenty-fourth Tekemnt one thousand nine hundred and forty
 eight (4th November, 1955) on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anni-
 versary of his coronation.
 Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah Haile Selassie I Elect of God,
 Emperor of Ethiopia
 Whereas, twenty-four years ago, at the beginning of our Reign, We
 granted to our faithful subjects and proclaimed a Constitution for the
 Empire of Ethiopia; and
 Whereas, Almighty God, the Source of Benefits, has strengthened and
 inspired Us to lead Our beloved people, during our Reign, through the
 greatest of trials and hardship, to an era of great progress in all fields;
 and
 Whereas, being desirous of consolidating the progress achieved and of
 laying a solid basis for the happiness and prosperity of the present and
 future generations of Our People, We have prepared a Revised Consti-
 tution for Our Empire after many years of searching study and reflection;
 and
 Whereas, Our Parliament, after due examination and deliberation,
 has submitted to Us its approval of the Revised Constitution;
 Now therefore, We, Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia, do, on the
 occasion of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of Our Coronation, hereby
 proclaim and place into force and effect as from to-day the Revised Consti-
 tution of the Empire of Ethiopia for the benefit, welfare and progress of
 Our beloved People.
 Given in Our Imperial Capital, on this 24th day of Tekemnt, 1948,
 and on the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of Our Coronation.
 
 1 English translation supplied by United States Embassy, Addis Ababa.
 
 170
 
 
 Ethiopia
 
 CHAPTER I
 THE ETHIOPIAN EMPIRE AND THE SUCCESSION
 OF THE THRONE
 Art. 1. The Empire of Ethiopia comprises all the territories, including
 the islands and the territorial waters, under the sovereignty of the
 Ethiopian Crown. Its sovereignty and territories are indivisible. Its terri-
 tories and the sovereign rights therein are inalienable.
 All Ethiopian subjects, whether living within or out the Empire constitute
 the Ethiopian People.
 Art. 2. The Imperial Dignity shall remain perpetually attached to the
 line of Haile Selassie I, descendent of King Sahle Selassie, whose line
 descends without interruption from the dynasty of Menelik I, son of thq
 Queen of Ethiopia, the Queen of Sheba, and King Solomon of Jerusalem.
 Art. 3. The succession to the Throne and Crown of the Empire by the
 Descendants of the Emperor and the exercise of the powers of Regency
 shall be determined as hereinafter provided.
 Art. 4. By virtue of His Imperial Blood, as well as by the anointing
 which He has received, the person of the Emperor is sacred, His dignity
 is inviolable and His Powers indisputable. He is consequently entitled
 to all the honors due to Him in accordance with tradition and the present
 Constitution. Any one so bold as to seek to injure the Emperor will be
 punished.
 Art. 5. The order of succession shall be linear, and only male, born in
 lawful wedlock, may succeed male; the nearest line shall pass before
 the more remote, and the elder in the line before the younger.
 In conformity with the provisions of this article and the following
 Articles 6-16, a special law shall determine the order of, and the qualifi-
 cations for, the succession.
 Art. 6. Among those entitled to the succession shall be reckoned also
 the son unborn, who shall immediately take his proper place in the line
 of succession the moment he is born into the world.
 Art. 7. In the event that, at the time of his succession to the Throne
 and Crown, the Emperor shall have attained the age of eighteen years,
 he shall, on the day determined by Him, but in any event not later than
 one year after His succession to the Crown, be anointed and crowned
 as Emperor the provisions and details of the coronation being determined
 in the coronation Ceremonial of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church of 2nd
 November 1930.
 Art. 8. Regency shall exist in the event that the Emperor is unable to
 exercise the Imperial Office whether by reasons of minority, absence
 from the Empire, or by reason of serious illness as determined by the
 
 171
 
 
 Crown Council. In such cases the Regency shall exercise in the name of the
 Emperor all the powers and prerogatives of the Crown, except that the
 Regency shall have no power to grant the title of Prince and shall have
 caretaker powers only as regard the properties of the Crown and of the
 Emperor, Regency shall automatically terminate upon the cessation as
 regards the Emperor, of the conditions having given rise to the regency,
 in accordance with the provisions of the present article. Regency shall
 be exercised respectively in the situations as provided for in Article 9
 and 11, by the person or by the Council as provided for in Article 10 and 11.
 Art. 9. In the event that the Emperor or in the event that the Crown
 Prince or the Heir Presumptive, in the situations provided for in Article
 11, shall not have attained the age of eighteen years, the Regency shall be
 exercised by the Council of Regency as provided for in Article 11.
 Art. 10. The Council of Regency shall consist of the Empress Mother,
 the two descendants of the line of Sahle Selassie most nearly related to
 the Emperor, as determined by the Crown Council, having reached the
 age of eighteen and being of sound mind, the Archbishop, the Prime
 Minister, the President of the Senate and the President of the Chamber
 of Deputies. The president of the Council of Regency shall be the Empress
 Mother, or, in Her absence, the Prime Minister. No decision of the Council
 of Regency shall be taken except by a majority vote of two-thirds of the
 members thereof.
 Art. 11. Regency shall be exercised by the Crown Prince or the Heir
 Presumptive, as the case may be, in the case of the serious illness, or the
 absence of the Emperor from the Empire. However, in the event that the
 Crown Prince or the Heir Presumptive, as the case may be, himself shall
 be subject to serious illness, or shall be absent from the Empire or shall
 not have attained his eighteenth year, the Regency shall be exercised
 by the Council of Regency, which shall automatically relinquish its func-
 tions to the Crown Prince or the Heir Presumptive, as the case may be,
 upon the cessation of any such disability of the Crown Prince or the Heir
 Presumptive, as the case may be. Serious illness of the Crown Prince or
 the Heir Presumptive, as the case may be, shall be determined by the
 Crown Council.
 Art. 12. Upon the birth of the Crown Prince, the Emperor shall desig-
 nate the members of the Councils of Guardianship to be convened and to
 assume its responsibility only in the event of Regency. The mother of the
 Crown Prince shall be ex officio a member of such Council. The Council
 of Guardianship shall receive in trust for the Crown Prince one third of
 the annual income and revenues received by the predecessor of the Crown
 Prince who has become Emperor, in conformity with the provisions of
 Article 19 (c).
 Art. 13. (a) In the event that the Emperor shall at any time have no
 male descendant or no male descendant capable of meeting the require-
 
 172
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 ments for succession to the Throne, He shall, after having previously
 consulted the Crown Council, publicly designate as Heir Presumptive
 from among His nearest male relatives, a direct descendant of Sable
 Selassie, meeting the requirement for succession to the Throne.
 (b) The determinations as to the qualifications for succession shall
 be made by the Emperor, after having previously consulted the Crown
 Council.
 (c) In case of a determination that a male descendant is incapable
 of meeting the requirements for succession, such determinations shall
 operate to exclude such male descendant in favor of the next male
 descendant. The designation of an Heir Presumptive shall become
 inoperative upon the subsequent birth of a male descendant.
 (d) In case of the minority of the Emperor, the designation of Heir
 Presumptive shall, in accordance with the provisions of the present
 article, be effected by the Council of Regency. However at the time
 of His coronation, and at any time thereafter, the Emperor shall be
 free to designate in accordance with the provisions of the present
 article another Heir Presumptive in replacement of the Heir Presump-
 tive designated by the Council of Regency or previously, by himself.
 Art. 14. Throughout His minority the place of residence of the Emperor
 shall be the Imperial Palace. Absence therefrom for travel or educational
 purposes may be authorized by law. Upon attaining the age of twelve
 years, the Emperor may make official appearances attended by the
 Council of Regency, the Princes, the "Balabats" and the dignitaries
 (Mekuanent).
 Art. 15. Any member of the Imperial family, who, being eligible for
 the succession, marries a foreigner or who marries without the consent of
 the Emperor, of the Regent or of the Council of Regency, as the case may
 be, shall forfeit all Imperial prerogatives for himself and his descendants.
 Art. 16. The Imperial family shall include all direct linear ascendants
 and descendants, together with their spouses, of the Emperor, with the
 exception of those who have not complied with the provisions of Article
 15 or who are not of the Ethiopian Orthodox Faith.
 Art. 17. The status, position, duties, responsibilities, privileges, emolu-
 ments, travels abroad and deportment of the Princes and of members
 of the Imperial family shall be considered by the Crown Council from time
 to time and their recommendations thereon shall be communicated
 to the Emperor for further action.
 Art. 18. Upon the death of the Emperor there shall be a period of full
 national mourning of three months followed by a period of half mourning
 of six months, and upon the death of the Empress there shall be a period
 of full national mourning of two months followed by a period of half
 mourning of four months. The Emperor shall proclaim lesser periods
 of full and half national mourning upon the deaths of other members
 
 Ethiopia
 
 173
 
 
 of the Imperial family except that no period of national mourning may
 cause to be postponed a coronation more than one year from the date of
 the succession to the Crown of the Emperor of His attaining the age of
 eighteen. In the event that the coronation takes place during a period
 of full or half mourning, such period of mourning shall be terminated
 seven days before the coronation.
 Art. 19. (a) The regalia of the Crown including all the regalia of the
 Empress and of the Crown Prince are inalienable as belonging to the
 Empire.
 (b) From the date of the proclamation of the present constitution all
 realty registered in the name of the Crown (Bete Mengist) are held in
 trust for the Crown under the guardianship of the Emperor and are
 inalienable.
 (c) It is the Emperor's right to administer all the inalienable properties
 of the Crown and all profits and revenues therefrom for the benefit
 of the Crown and the Empire; and to receive and administer an annual
 appropriation, as provided by law, from the Imperial Treasury which
 shall, with the aforesaid profits and revenues, be adequate for the
 fulfilment of His functions under the present constitution. In case of
 a Regency, the civil list shall be annually determined by law.
 (d) All properties held in the names of the Emperor or members of the
 Imperial Family are private property and, as such, are under the same
 regime as that applicable to all properties of nationals of the Empire.
 (e) The Emperor's Court shall be under His direction and He may
 make such arrangements as He thinks appropriate. He may, at will,
 appoint to, or dismiss from all posts at His Court, such persons as He
 shall see fit.
 Art. 20. Upon the establishment of a Council of Regency, each member
 thereof shall take, in the presence of the Emperor, the following oath which
 shall be administered by the Archbishop: "In the name of the Almighty,
 and as a member of the Council of Regency, I hereby swear to defend with
 all my power the rights, privileges and inheritance of His Majesty the
 Emperor so long as I shall remain a member of the Council of Regency;
 that I will at all times respect and defend the Constitution; and that
 in all my actions and conduct, as a member of that Council, I will ever be
 motivated by respect for the Constitution and the firm resolve of pro-
 tecting the rights, privileges and inheritance of His Majesty the Emperor
 so that they may be intact at the moment when He shall be anointed and
 Crowned Emperor of Ethiopia. So help me God"
 The Archbishop shall himself take the same oath.
 Art. 21. On the occasion of His coronation, the Emperor shall take the
 following oath: "In the name of Almighty God, We... the Emperor of
 Ethiopia, swear that We will uphold and defend the Constitution of the
 Empire; that We will govern Our Subjects with patience and devotion
 
 174
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 for their general welfare and in accordance with the Constitution and the
 laws; and We will faithfully defend, with all the means in Our Power,
 the integrity and territory of Our Empire; that We will faithfully see to
 the impartial execution of all laws approved by the Parliament and
 proclaimed by Us; that We profess and will defend the Holy Orthodox
 Faith based on the doctrines of St. Mark of Alexandria, professed in
 Ethiopia since the Holy Emperors Abreha and Atsbiha; that We will
 ever promote the spiritual and material welfare and advancement of Our
 subjects, that with the aid of the Almighty, We will faithfully execute the
 promises which We have here undertaken. So help Us God."
 Art. 22. On the occasion of the Coronation of the Emperor, if over
 twelve years of age, the Crown Prince or the Heir Presumptive, as the
 case may be, all members of the Crown Council and all members of the
 Parliament shall individually take an oath of homage and fidelity to the
 Emperor.
 Art. 23. In pursuance of the requirements of Article 22, the Crown
 Prince or the Heir Presumptive, as the case may be, if over the age of
 twelve shall take the following oath: "In the name of the Almighty, I
 hereby swear that I will faithfully observe all the precepts and directions
 of My August Father ("Sovereign" in case of an Heir Presumptive) and
 will ever strive to respect His wishes and seek not after that which is not
 given to me, and be not as impatient as Adonais or as daring as Absalom;
 that I will ever conduct myself so as to be worthy of my Sire (Sovereign in
 case of an Heir Presumptive), of my Imperial Blood and of the high
 station which is ("may be" in case of an Heir Presumptive) my destiny;
 that I will at all times, respect the Constitution and the laws, and will ever
 profess and defend the Faith of Our Orthodox Church. I swear that, with
 the assistance of the Almighty, I will faithfully execute the promises which
 I have here undertaken. So help me God."
 In the event that the aforesaid oath shall not have been taken on the
 occasion of the Coronation either by the Crown Prince or by the Heir
 Presumptive, as the case may be, it shall be taken before the Emperor
 by the Crown Prince or the Heir Presumptive, as the case may be, upon
 his attaining the age of eighteen.
 Art. 24. In pursuance of the requirements of Article 22, the members
 of the Parliament shall take the following oath: "In the name of the
 Almighty I hereby swear allegiance and fidelity to my Sovereign His
 Imperial Majesty... and that I will, as member of the Parliament, faith-
 fully place above all else the interest and welfare of Ethiopia and of its
 Sovereign; that I will, at all times, faithfully respect the laws and Consti-
 tution of the Empire, and that I will disclose no secret or confidential
 information revealed to me in connection with my official duty and
 position. So help me God."
 Art. 25. In pursuance of the requirements of Article 22, the members
 
 Ethiopia
 
 175
 
 
 of the Crown Council shall take the following oath: "In the name of the
 Almighty I hereby swear allegiance and fidelity to my Sovereign His
 Imperial Majesty... and that I will, as member of the Parliament,
 faithfully place above all else the interest and welfare of Ethiopia and of its
 Sovereign; that I will, at all times, faithfully respect the laws and Consti-
 tution of the Empire, and that I will disclose no secret or confidential
 information revealed to me in connection with my official duties and
 position. So help me God."
 CHAPTER II
 THE POWERS AND PREROGATIVES OF THE
 EMPEROR
 Art. 26. The Sovereignty of the Empire is vested in the Emperor and
 the supreme authority over all the affairs of the Empire is exercised by
 Him as the Head of the State, in the manner provided for in the present
 constitution.
 Art. 27. The Emperor determines the organization, powers and duties
 of all Ministries, executive departments and the administration of the
 Government and appoints, promotes, transfers, suspends and dismisses
 the officials of the same.
 Art. 28. The Emperor appoints Mayors of the municipalities referred to
 in Article 129 of the present constitution from three candidates presented
 in each case by the Municipal Council thereof.
 Art. 29. The Emperor reserves the right, with the advice and consent
 of Parliament to declare war, He, further, reserves the right to decide what
 armed forces shall be maintained both in time of peace and in time of
 war, as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces. He has the right to
 organize and command the said forces; to commission and to confer
 military rank upon the officers of the said forces; and to promote, transfer
 or dismiss any of the said officers. He has, further, the right to declare
 a state of siege, martial law, or national emergency, and to take such
 measures as are necessary to meet a threat to the defence or integrity
 of the Empire and to assure its defence and integrity.
 Art. 30. The Emperor exercises the supreme direction of the foreign
 relations of the Empire. The Emperor accredits and receives Ambassadors,
 Ministers and Missions; He alone has the right to settle disputes with
 foreign Powers by adjudication and other peaceful means, and provides
 for and agrees to measures of co-operation with foreign powers for the
 realization of the ends of security and common defence. He, alone, has
 the right to ratify, on behalf of Ethiopia, treaties and other international
 agreements, and to determine which treaties and international agreements
 shall be subject to ratification before becoming binding upon the Empire.
 
 176
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 However, all treaties of peace and all treaties or international agreements
 involving a modification of the territory of the Empire or of a sovereignty
 or jurisdiction over any part of such territory, or laying a burden on
 Ethiopian subjects personally, or modifying legislation in existence, or
 requiring expenditure of the State funds, or involving loans or monopolies
 shall, before becoming binding upon the Empire and the inhabitants
 thereof, be laid before Parliament and if both houses of Parliament shall
 approve the same in accordance with the provisions of Article 88-90
 inclusive of the present Constitution, shall then be submitted to the
 Emperor for ratification.
 Art. 31. (a) The Emperor alone confers and withdraws the title of
 Prince and other honors, and institutes new orders.
 (b) Without His special leave, no Ethiopian subject and no foreign
 nationals in any Government service in the Empire may accept any
 honor, insignia of orders, dignity or title of or from a foreign Govern-
 ment. The granting of any title, honor or order may exempt no one
 from the common duties and burdens of the subject, nor may it carry
 with it any preferential admission to the offices of the State.
 (c) Officials who are released from office with assurances of Imperial
 favor, retain the title and rank of the office they have filled.
 (d) He also makes grants from abandoned properties, and properties
 in escheat for the purpose of recompensing faithful service to the
 Crown.
 Art. 32. The Emperor has the right to coin, print and issue money.
 Art. 33. The Emperor has the right to convene the annual sessions of
 the deliberative Chambers and to convoke extraordinary sessions thereof.
 At the opening of each session of the Chambers, He may present or cause
 to be presented a speech from the Throne concerning the legislative
 program recommended by Him. He has the right to postpone the opening
 of and to suspend, for not more than thirty days, and to extend any
 session of Parliament. He has the right to dissolve the Chamber or either
 of them by an order, providing at the same time for the appointment
 of a new Senate or the election of a new Chamber of Deputies, or both,
 as the case may be, and for the convocation of the Chambers for a session
 within four months from the date of the Order.
 Art. 34. In accordance with the provisions of Article 86, 88, 91 and 92
 of the present Constitution, the Emperor has the right to initiate legis-
 lation and to originate other resolutions and to proclaim all laws, after
 the same shall have been passed by the Parliament.
 Art. 35. The Emperor has the right and the duty to maintain justice
 through the courts; and the right to grant pardons and amnesties and to
 commute penalties.
 Art. 36. The Emperor as Sovereign has the duty to take all measures
 that may be necessary to ensure, at all times, the defence and integrity of
 
 Ethiopia
 
 177
 
 
 the Empire; the safety and welfare of its inhabitants, including their
 enjoyment of the human rights and fundamental liberties recognized
 in the present Constitution, and the protection of all His subjects and their
 rights and interests abroad. Subject to the other provisions of this Consti-
 tution, He has all the rights and powers necessary for the accomplishment
 of the ends set out in the present article.
 CHAPTER III
 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PEOPLE
 Art. 37. No one shall be denied the equal protection of the laws.
 Art. 38. There shall be no discrimination among Ethiopian subjects with
 respect to the enjoyment of all civil rights.
 Art. 39. The law shall determine the conditions of acquisition and loss of
 Ethiopian nationality and of Ethiopian citizenship.
 Art. 40. There shall be no interference with the exercise, in accordance
 with the law, of the rites of any religion or creed by residents of the Empire,
 provided that such rites be not utilized for political purposes or be not
 prejudicial to public order or morality.
 Art. 41. Freedom of speech and of the press is guaranteed throughout
 the Empire in accordance with the law.
 Art. 42. Correspondence shall be subject to no censorship, except in
 time of declared national emergency.
 Art. 43. No one within the Empire may be deprived of life, liberty or
 property without due process of law.
 Art. 44. Everyone has the right, within the limits of the law, to own
 and dispose of property. No one may be deprived of his property except
 upon a finding by ministerial order issued pursuant to the requirements of
 a special expropriation law enacted in accordance with the provisions
 of Articles 88, 89 or 90 of the present Constitution, and except upon
 payment of just compensation determined in the absence of agreement,
 by judicial procedures established by law. Said ministerial order, to be
 effective shall be approved by the Council of Ministers and published
 in the Negarit Gazeta.
 Art. 45. Ethiopian subjects shall have the right, in accordance with
 the conditions prescribed by law, to assemble peaceably and without
 arms.
 Art. 46. Freedom of travel within the Empire and to change domicile
 therein is assured to all subjects of the Empire, in accordance with the law.
 Art. 47. Every Ethiopian subject has the right to engage in any occu-
 pation and form or join occupational associations, in accordance with the
 law.
 Art. 48. The Ethiopian family, as the source of the maintenance and
 
 Ethiopia
 
 178
 
 
 development of the Empire and the primary basis of education and social
 harmony, is under the special protection of the law.
 Art. 49. No Ethiopian subject may be banished from the Empire.
 Art. 50. No Ethiopian subject may be extradited to a foreign country.
 No other person shall be extradited except as provided by international
 agreements.
 Art. 51. No one may be arrested without a warrant by a court, except in
 case of flagrant or serious violation of the law in force. Every arrested
 person shall be brought before the judicial authority within forty-eight
 hours of his arrest. However, if the arrest takes place in a locality which is
 removed from the court by a distance which can be traversed only on
 foot in not less than 48 hours, the court shall have discretion to extend
 the period of 48 hours. The period of detention shall be reckoned as a part
 of the term of imprisonment imposed by sentence. No one shall be held
 in prison awaiting trial on a criminal charge the sole penalty of which is
 a fine.
 Art. 52. In all criminal prosecution the accused, duly submitting to the
 court, shall have the right to a speedy trial and to be confronted with the
 witnesses against him, to have compulsory process, in accordance with
 the law, for obtaining witnesses in his favour at the expense of the Govern-
 ment and to have the assistance of Counsel for his defence who, if the
 accused is unable to obtain the same by his own funds, shall be assigned
 and provided to the accused by the court.
 Art. 53. No person accused of and arrested for a crime shall be presumed
 guilty until so proved.
 Art. 54. Punishment is personal. No one shall be punished except in
 accordance with the law and after conviction for an offence committed
 by him.
 Art. 55. No person shall be punished for any offence which has not been
 declared by law to be punishable before the commission of such offence,
 or shall suffer any punishment.
 Art. 56. No one shall be punished twice for the same offence.
 Art. 57. No one shall be subject to cruel and inhuman punishment.
 Art. 58. No one shall be imprisoned for debt, except in case of legally
 proved fraud or of refusal, either to pay moneys or property adjudged
 by the court to have been taken in violation of the law, or to pay a fine,
 or to fulfil legal obligations of maintenance; this provision shall not
 have the effect of absolving the debtor's obligation.
 Art. 59. No sentence of death shall be executed unless it is confirmed
 by the Emperor.
 Art. 60. Confiscation of property as penalty shall not be imposed except
 in cases of treason against the Emperor or the Empire as defined by law;
 sequestration of property as a penalty shall not be imposed except in cases
 of property belonging to persons residing abroad and conspiring against
 
 Ethiopia
 
 179
 
 
 or engaging in deliberately hostile acts against the Emperor or the Empire
 as defined by law. Attachment proceedings covering the whole or part of the
 property of a person made under judicial authority to cover payment of
 civil liability, or arising out of the commission of an offence or to meet
 taxes or fines, shall not be deemed a confiscation of property.
 Art. 61. All persons and all private domiciles shall be exempt from
 unlawful searches and seizures.
 Art. 62. (a) In accordance with tradition and the provisions of Article 4
 of this constitution no one shall have the right to bring suit against the
 Emperor.
 (b) Any resident of the Empire may bring suit in the courts of Ethiopia
 against the Government, or any Ministry, Department, Agency or instru-
 mentality thereof, for wrongful acts resulting in substantial damage. In
 the event that the courts shall find that such suit has been brought mal-
 iciously or without foundation, the Government, or any Ministry Depart-
 ment or Agency, instrumentality, or official thereof against whom or
 which such suit was brought, shall have a right of action against such
 resident for such malicious or unfounded suit, and the court shall in such
 cases decree remedies or penalties in accordance with the law.
 Art. 63. Everyone in the Empire shall have the right to present pe-
 titions to the Emperor in accordance with the law.
 Art. 64. Everyone in the Empire has the duty to respect and obey the
 Constitution, laws, decrees, orders and regulations of the Empire. Ethio-
 pian subjects, in addition, owe loyalty to the Emperor and to the Empire,
 and have the duty of defending the Emperor and the Empire against all
 enemies, foreign and domestic; to perform public services, including
 military services, when called upon to do so; and to exercise the right of
 suffrage which is conferred upon them by the Constitution.
 Art. 65. Respect for the right and freedoms of others and the require-
 ments of public order and the general welfare shall alone justify any
 limitations upon the rights guaranteed in the foregoing articles of the
 present Chapter.
 CHAPTER IV
 THE MINISTERS OF THE EMPIRE
 Art. 66. The Emperor has the right to select, appoint and dismiss the
 Prime Minister and all other Ministers and Vice-Ministers, each of whom
 shall, before entering upon his functions, take before the Emperor the
 following oath of fidelity to His Majesty and to the Constitution: "In the
 name of the Almighty I hereby swear allegiance and fidelity to my Sover-
 eign His Imperial Majesty... and that, as member of the Council of
 Ministers, I will faithfully place above all else the interest and welfare of
 
 180
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 Ethiopia and of its Sovereign; that I will, at all times, faithfully respect
 the Laws and Constitution of the Empire, and that I will disclose no secret
 or confidential information revealed to me in connection with my official
 duties and position. So help me God."
 The appointment, promotion, transfer, suspension, retirement, dis-
 missal and discipline of all other Government officials and employees
 shall be governed by regulations made by the Council of Ministers and
 approved and proclaimed by the Emperor.
 Art. 67. Princes eligible for the Crown shall not be appointed Ministers
 in the Council of Ministers. No one whose parents were not Ethiopian
 subjects at the time of his birth shall be appointed a Minister.
 Art. 68. Each Minister shall be individually responsible to the Emperor
 and to the State for the discharge of the duties of his respective Ministry,
 including the execution of the laws and decrees concerning that Ministry.
 Art. 69. The Ministers shall form collectively the Council of Ministers
 and shall be responsible to the Emperor for all advice and recommendations
 given to Him in Council. The rules and procedures of the Council shall
 be drawn up by the Ministers in Council and submitted to His Majesty
 for approval.
 Art. 70. The Emperor may in such instances as He deems appropriate,
 convene the Crown Council which shall consist of the Archbishop, such
 Princes, Ministers, and dignitaries as may be designated by Him, and the
 President of the Senate. The Crown Council shall be presided over by the
 Emperor or by a member designated by Him.
 Art. 71. The Ministers shall discuss in Council and through the Prime
 Minister submit to the Emperor all matters of policy therein discussed.
 In all cases in which legislation is deemed to be necessary or appropriate,
 the decision made in Council and approved by the Emperor shall be com-
 municated by the Prime Minister to Parliament in form of a proposal
 for legislation.
 Art. 72. The Prime Minister shall present to Parliament proposals of
 legislation made by the Council of Ministers and approved by the Emperor.
 He shall also present to the Emperor the proposal of legislation approved
 by the Parliament and the Decrees proposed by the Council of Ministers.
 He shall have the right to attend any meeting of either Chamber of
 Parliament, or any joint meeting of the Chambers, or any meeting of any
 committee of either Chamber, and to speak at such meeting on any
 questions under discussion. He shall be obliged to attend personally, or
 by his deputy, either Chamber when his presence is requested by majority
 vote of the members thereof, and to answer verbally or in writing questions
 concerning his office.
 Art. 73. The Ministers shall have the right to attend any meeting of
 either Chamber of Parliament, or any joint meeting of the Chambers or
 any meeting of any committee of either Chamber, and to speak at such
 
 Ethiopia
 
 181
 
 
 meetings on any question concerning the conduct of their Ministries;
 and they shall be obliged in person, or by their deputies, to answer verbally
 or in writing questions concerning the legislation to be enacted.
 Art. 74. No Minister, nor any person in a position with or in the service
 of the Government may:
 (a) For remuneration, compensation or benefit of financial value engage
 in any activity or accept a position in or with any enterprise organ-
 ization in which there is no governmental participation;
 (b) enter into or be a part to any contract or other arrangements with
 any governmental organization in the Empire awarding, permitting
 or recognizing any concession or monopolistic or other exclusive
 privilege in the nature of a concession or monopoly;
 (c) however, such Minister or person shall be free to manage and develop
 his properties so long as their management or development is not
 prejudicial to or inconsistent with the performance of his duties.
 Art. 75. The Ministers including the Prime Minister may be tried only
 before the Supreme Imperial Court upon charges of offences as determined
 by the law, committed in connection with their official functions. Such
 prosecution may be initiated either by order of the Emperor or by a
 majority vote of both Houses of Parliament. A special prosecutor shall be
 appointed to that end conformably to the orders of the Emperor.
 CHAPTER V
 THE LEGISLATIVE CHAMBERS
 Section I. Provisions applicable to both Chambers
 Art. 76. The Parliament shall be composed of a Chamber of Deputies
 and a Senate. No one can be simultaneously a member of both the Chamber
 of Deputies and the Senate. The two Chambers shall meet together at
 the beginning and at the end of each session; in the circumstances set forth
 in Articles 90 and 91; upon the call of the Emperor; and upon such other
 occasions as may be determined by the Chambers. The President of the
 Senate shall preside at all joint meetings of the Chambers.
 Art. 77. The regular sessions of Parliament shall convene on the twenty-
 third day of the month of Tekemnt of each year in the capital of the
 Empire and shall continue to the first day of the month of Sene (8 June).
 Until a new Parliament shall be elected and convened in accordance
 with the present Constitution and the electoral law to be enacted, the
 two Chambers of Parliament, as heretofore constituted, shall continue to
 sit and shall, in accordance with the provisions and procedures established
 in Chapter V of the present Constitution, exercise the prerogatives and
 functions and fulfil the responsibilities provided for in respect of Parlia-
 
 182
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 ment. The first election to the Chamber of Deputies shall be completed
 within two years from the entry into force of the present Constitution
 and in accordance with the provisions of the electoral law.
 Art. 78. No meeting of either Chamber of Parliament shall be closed
 to the public except upon a request by the Prime Minister or upon a
 decision by a majority vote of the Chamber of Deputies or the Senate,
 as the case may be, to that effect. No joint meeting of the Chambers shall
 be closed to the public except upon a request by the Prime Minister or a
 decision by a majority of each of the Chambers to that effect. If after a
 question has been declared to be secret, a member of either Chamber makes
 it known to the public either in a speech, or by the press, or by writings
 or in any other way, he shall be punished according to the provisions of
 Penal Law.
 Art. 79. Neither of the Chambers shall commence its deliberations on the
 first day of any session without the presence of two thirds of its members
 nor continue its deliberations nor take any vote on any succeeding day
 of any sessions without the presence of a majority of the members. At joint
 meetings of the Chambers the presence of a majority of the'members of
 each Chamber shall be required for deliberation and for voting.
 Art. 80. If the number of Deputies and of Senators prescribed in Article
 79 is not present on the day designated for the convening of Parliament or
 if, thereafter, either of the Chambers or the Chambers in joint meeting
 cannot continue its deliberations or vote for lack of the required attendance,
 the members present shall take such measures as may be authorized
 in the rules of procedure of the respective Chambers to compel the atten-
 dance of a sufficient number of the absent members and their respective
 Presidents.
 Art. 81. Every Deputy or Senator, before taking his seat in the Chamber
 to which he has been elected or appointed, shall take before the Emperor,
 or, if directed by Him, before the President of the Legislative Chamber
 concerned, an oath of loyalty to the Emperor and to the Empire, and
 shall swear that he will obey the Constitution and the laws of the Empire
 and will perform his duties conscientiously and without fear or favor.
 Art. 82. Each Chamber shall determine its own rules of procedure and
 internal discipline.
 Art. 83. Members of Parliament shall receive salaries determined by
 law. Any law increasing the salaries of Members of Parliament shall be
 effective only from the date of election of the next Parliament.
 Art. 84. No action or charge may be brought against any member of
 Parliament or against any Minister appearing by right or upon the invi-
 tation of either Chambers for words uttered or written statements submit-
 ted by him at any meeting of either Chamber, or any joint meeting of the
 Chambers, or any meeting of any committee of either Chamber. Never-
 theless, every member of each Chamber of Parliament shall be obliged
 
 Ethiopia
 
 183
 
 
 to respect all rules of order, conduct and procedure adopted by such
 Chamber for the transaction of its business and shall be subject to disci-
 plinary action on the part of such Chamber for violation of such rules.
 No action or charge may be brought against any person or newspaper
 for publication, by or under the authority of Parliament or of either
 Chamber thereof, as the case may be, of any report, paper, votes or
 proceedings of Parliament or either Chamber thereof, as the case may be.
 Art. 85. No member of Parliament, during a session thereof, may be
 arrested or detained or summoned to answer a criminal charge unless the
 permission of the Chamber of which he is a member be obtained or he be
 arrested in flagrante delicto; a comparable immunity does not apply to
 civil cases.
 Art. 86. Laws may be proposed to either or both Chambers of Parlia-
 ment:
 (a) by the Emperor;
 (b) by ten or more members of either Chamber of Parliament, except
 that every proposal involving an increase in Governmental expenditure
 or a new or increased tax shall first be presented to the Chamber of
 Deputies.
 Art. 87. All matters in either Chamber or in joint meetings of the
 Chambers shall be determined by vote of the majority of the members
 present, except as provided in Article 131. In the event of an equal division
 of votes, the presiding officer shall have a casting vote.
 Art. 88. Every proposal of legislation approved by one Chamber of
 Parliament shall be immediately forwarded through the President thereof
 to the other Chamber. If it is approved by the other without amendments
 within a period of two months, it shall be promptly communicated through
 the Prime Minister to the Emperor and either shall be promulgated as law,
 or shall be returned by the Emperor to the Chambers with His observations
 thereon, or with a new proposal of legislation as provided in Article 91.
 All laws duly approved by both Chambers or Parliament shall be forward-
 ed to the Emperor through the Prime Minister by the President of the
 Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. In the event that such law shall re-
 ceive the approval and signature of the Emperor, it shall be published
 by the Minister of the Pen in the Negarit Gazeta, with recital of the
 affixing of the signature and the Great Seal of the Emperor. All Imperial
 Decrees and all ministerial decrees and orders shall be published in the
 Negarit Gazeta.
 Art. 89. If a proposal of legislation approved by one Chamber is not
 finally acted upon by the other within the aforesaid period of two months,
 the Chambers shall meet together to discuss the said proposal. If the
 proposal is approved in such joint meetings, with or without amendments,
 within 30 days, it shall be communicated to the Emperor for action in
 accordance with Article 88.
 
 184
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 Art. 90. If within the aforesaid period of two months a proposal of
 legislation approved by one Chamber is approved by the other with
 amendments, the said proposal shall be returned to the first Chamber for
 further consideration. If, upon such further consideration, it is approved
 within 80 days, by the first Chamber, with the said amendments, it shall
 be communicated to the Emperor for action in accordance with Article 88.
 If within 30 days, the amendments, are not accepted by the first Chamber,
 the Chambers shall thereupon meet together to discuss the proposals.
 If in such joint meeting the proposal is approved with or without amend-
 ments, within 30 days, it shall thereupon be communicated to the Emperor
 for action in accordance with Article 88.
 Art. 91. If a proposal of legislation approved in one of the Chambers is
 rejected by the other within two months after communication to the
 other, as provided in Article 88, or if a proposal of legislation is not
 approved, with or without amendments, after discussion in joint meeting,
 as provided in Articles 89 and 90, full reports on the situation shall be
 promptly communicated to the Emperor by the President of both Cham-
 bers of Parliament, through the Prime Minister, and the Emperor may,
 thereupon, cause to be transmitted to both Chambers of Parliament His
 observations in regard to such proposals of legislation, or cause to be
 transmitted to the Chambers a proposal of legislation on the same
 subject.
 Art. 92. In case of emergency that arises when the Chambers are not
 sitting, the Emperor may proclaim decrees consistent with the Consti-
 tution which shall have the force of law upon publication in the Negarit
 Gazeta pending a decision on the same by Parliament. To that end, the
 text of each such decree shall be transmitted for consideration by both
 Chambers of Parliament at their first meeting following each such pro-
 clamation. In the event that, conforming to provisions of Articles 88, 89
 and 90 of the present Constitution, Parliament shall approve such decrees,
 they shall continue in force and shall become law upon publication in the
 Negarit Gazeta of said approval.
 In the event that Parliament shall disapprove any such decree, each
 such decree shall cease to have force and effect upon the publication in the
 Negarit Gazeta of such disapproval.
 Section II. The Chamber of Deputies
 Art. 93. The entire territory of the Empire as defined in Article 1 of the
 present Constitution shall be divided into electoral districts containing
 as nearly as possible two hundred thousands inhabitants. The location and
 limits of each electoral district shall be determined by law and each such
 district shall be as regular in shape as circumstances permit. In addition,
 each town with a population exceeding thirty thousand inhabitants shall
 
 Ethiopia
 
 185
 
 
 be entitled to one Deputy and one additional Deputy for each fifty thou-
 sand inhabitants in excess of thirty thousand.
 Art. 94. Each electoral district shall be represented by two Deputies.
 Art. 95. All Ethiopian subjects by birth of twenty-one years of age or
 more who are regularly domiciled or habitually present in any electoral
 district and who possess the qualifications required by the electoral
 district for candidates from such district as members of the Chamber
 of Deputies may vote. The system of voting shall be secret and direct.
 Details and procedure shall be prescribed by law.
 Art. 96. To be eligible as a Deputy, a person must be by birth an
 Ethiopian subject who:
 (a) has reached the age of twenty-five years;
 (b) is a bona fide resident and owner of property in his electoral district
 to the extent required by electoral law and
 (c) is not disqualified under any provision of the electoral law.
 Art. 97. Deputies shall be elected for terms of four years and shall be
 eligible for re-election, subject to their continued possession of the qualifi-
 cations set forth in Article 96.
 Art. 98. Vacancies that may occur in the membership of the Chamber
 of Deputies shall be filled as provided in the electoral law.
 Art. 99. The President and two Vice-Presidents of the Chamber of
 Deputies shall be elected each year from and by the members of the
 Chamber.
 Art. 100. The Chamber of Deputies shall be sole judge of the qualifi-
 cations and election of its members.
 Section III. The Senate
 Art. 101. The Senate shall consist of the Senators appointed by the
 Emperor for six years.
 Art. 102. The Senate shall be composed of a number of persons, not
 exceeding one half of the total number of Deputies, to be chosen by the
 Emperor from among those who have, by their acts, secured the confidence
 and esteem of the people, and from among those who have served their
 country and their Government with distinction.
 Art. 103. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Senate, a
 person must be by birth an Ethiopian subject who:
 (a) has reached the age of thirty-five years;
 (b) is a Prince or other Dignitary, or a former high Government official,
 or other person generally esteemed for his character, judgment and
 public services; and
 (c) is not disqualified under any provision of the electoral law.
 Art. 104. The Senators first appointed by the Emperor as provided
 in Article 101 shall, immediately after their first meeting, be divided into
 
 Ethiopia
 
 186
 
 
 Ethiopia                          187
 three equal groups. The Senators of the first Group shall be succeeded at
 the end of the second year by Senators appointed in accordance with
 the provisions of Article 101, those of the second group at the end of the
 fourth year, and those of the third group at the end of the sixth year,
 so that one third be succeeded every second year.
 Art. 105. Senators shall be eligible for re-appointment subject to their
 continued possession of the qualifications set forth in Article 103.
 Art. 106. Vacancies in the membership of the Senate shall be filled by
 appointments in the manner provided in Article 101.
 Art. 107. The President and the two Vice-Presidents of the Senate shall
 be appointed each year by the Emperor from among the Senators.
 CHAPTER VI
 THE JUDICIAL POWER
 Art. 108. The Judicial power shall be vested in the courts established
 by law and shall be exercised by the Courts in accordance with the law
 and in the name of the Emperor. Except in a situation declared in conform-
 ity with the provisions of Article 29 of the present Constitution, no person,
 except those in active military service, may be subject to trial by military
 courts.
 Art. 109. There shall be a Supreme Imperial Court and such other
 Courts as may be authorized or established by law. The jurisdiction of
 each court shall be determined by law.
 Art. 110. The Judges shall be independent in conducting trials and
 giving judgments in accordance with the law. In the administration of
 justice, they submit to no other authority than that of the law.
 Art. 111. The Judges shall be appointed by the Emperor. They shall
 be of the highest character and reputation and shall be experienced and
 skilled in the law which they may be called upon to apply. Their nomin-
 ation, appointment, promotion, removal, transfer and retirement shall
 be determined by a special law governing the Judicary.
 Art. 112. Judges shall sit in public, except that in cases which might
 endanger public order or affect public morals they may sit in camera.
 CHAPTER VII
 FINANCE
 Art. 113. No tax, duty, impost or excise shall be imposed, increased,
 reduced or abolished except by law. No exemption from payment of any
 tax, duty, impost or excise imposed by law shall be granted except as
 authorized by law.
 
 
 Art. 114. The fiscal year shall be fixed by special law. The Council of
 Ministers shall, each year, with the approval of the Emperor, and in
 accordance with the requirements of the law, present to Parliament a
 draft of a law for the approval of the budget of the following year, which
 budget shall accompany the said draft of law.
 Art. 116. Each of the Chambers of Parliament shall examine the said
 budget in detail and vote on it item by item. Parliament shall under no
 circumstances increase the total sum set down in the budget for expendi-
 tures. The allowance for the unforeseen expenses in the said budget shall
 be fixed by Parliament. Parliament shall complete the budget vote for
 submission to the Emperor, at least one month before the beginning of
 the new fiscal year.
 Art. 117. If the draft of the law presented as provided in Article 116
 has not been approved by Parliament and prbclaimed as law before the
 beginning of the fiscal year, the budget of the previous year shall continue
 in force until a new budget law has been proclaimed.
 Art. 118. If additional funds are urgently required in the course of any
 fiscal year, the Minister or Ministers concerned shall present a supplemen-
 tary budget to the Council of Ministers, which, with the approval of the
 Emperor, may present an appropriate draft of law to the Chamber of
 Deputies.
 Art. 119. No loan or pledge, guaranty or collateral thereof may be
 contracted for within or without the Empire, by any Governmental
 organization within the Empire, except as authorized by a law duly
 adopted in accordance with the provisions of Articles 88, 89 or 90 of
 the present Constitution.
 Article 120. Within four months after the end of every fiscal year the
 Council of Ministers shall present to the Emperor and to Parliament a
 detailed report on the receipts and expenditures of the said year. The report
 shall be immediately referred to the Auditor-General, who shall within
 three months present his comments thereon to the Emperor and to
 Parliament.
 Art. 121. There shall be an Auditor-General who shall be appointed
 by the Emperor. He shall be a person who is known to be of the highest
 character, as well as to possess the requisite technical capacity. His func-
 tions shall be defined by law. They shall include the auditing of the ac-
 counts of all Ministries, departments and agencies of the Government,
 and the making of periodic reports to the Emperor and to Parliament on
 the fiscal operations of the Government. The Auditor-General shall
 at all times be entitled to have access to all books and records relating
 to the said accounts.
 
 188
 
 Ethiopia
 
 
 CHAPTER VIII
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 122. The present revised Constitution, together with those inter-
 national treaties, conventions and obligations to which Ethiopia shall be
 party, shall be the supreme law of the Empire, and all future legislation,
 decrees, orders, judgments, decisions and acts inconsistent therewith
 shall be null and void.
 Art. 123. The city of Addis Ababa is the capital of the Empire.
 Art. 124. The flag of the Empire consists of three horizontal bands,
 the uppermost green, the middle yellow and the nethermost red, in such
 detail as determined by law.
 Art. 125. The official language of the Empire is Amharic.
 Art. 126. The Ethiopian Orthodox Church, founded in the fourth centu-
 ry, on the doctrines of Saint Mark, is the established Church of the Empire
 and is, as such, supported by the State. The Emperor shall always pro-
 fess the Ethiopian Orthodox Faith. The name of the Emperor shall be
 mentioned in all religious services.
 Art. 127. The organization of secular administration of the Established
 Church shall be governed by law. The Archbishop and Bishops shall be
 elected by the ecclesiastical electoral college consisting of representatives
 of the clergy and of the laity of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. The
 spiritual consecration shall be performed according to the Canonical
 Law, subject to the approval of the Emperor of their election and ap-
 pointment. The Emperor has the right to promulgate the decrees, edicts
 and public regulations for the Church except those concerning monastic
 life and other spiritual administrations.
 Art. 128. No one shall utilize religious activities or organizations for
 commercial purposes except as authorized by law.
 Art. 129. Subject to the conditions established by legislation duly
 adopted in accordance with the provisions of Article 88, 89 or 90 of the
 present Constitution, all towns shall be incorporated by Charters establish-
 ed in accordance with such legislation, and municipal councils shall
 be established respectively in municipalities of the Empire.
 Art. 130. (a) The natural resources of, and the sub-soil of the Empire
 including those beneath its waters, are state Domain.
 (b) The natural resources in the waters, forests, land, air, lakes, rivers
 and ports of the Empire are a sacred trust for the benefit of present
 and succeeding generations of the Ethiopian people. The conservation
 of the said resources is essential for the preservation of the Empire.
 The Imperial Ethiopian Government shall accordingly take such measures
 as may be necessary and proper, in conformity with the Constitution,
 for the conservation of the said resources.
 
 Ethiopia
 
 189
 
 
 190                            Ethiopia
 (c) None of the said resources shall be exploited by any person natural
 or juridical, including all lands in escheat; and all abandoned properties,
 whether real or personal, as well as all products of the sub-soil, all
 forests and all grazing lands, water courses, lakes and territorial waters
 are State Domain.
 Art. 131. The Constitution may be amended by an identical Joint
 Resolution adopted by three fourths of the members of each Chamber
 in two separate sessions of Parliament and proclaimed with the approval
 and authority of the Emperor.
 Given at Addis Ababa this twenty-fourth day of Tekemnt
 (4th November, 1955)
 
 
</pre>
