Supplement to the Republic of Zambia Government Gazette dated the 25th August, 1973

[No. 27 of 1973

THE CONSTITUTION OF ZAMBIA ACT, 1973

Arrangement of Sections

Section

1.	Short title

2.	Interpretation

3.	Repeal and revocation of Zambia Independence Act,

1964, and Zambia Independence Order, 1964

4.	Commencement of the Constitution

5.	Printing and publication of the Constitution

6.	Existing laws

7.	Prerogatives and privileges of the President

8.	Continuation in office of President

9.	Existing offices

10.	The National Assembly

11.	Succession to property and assets

12.	Rights, liabilities and obligations

13.	Legal proceedings

14.	Transitional provisions

15.	Continuation of declaration under section 29 of existing

Constitution

16.	Appeals in respect of certain decisions affecting pensions

and like benefits

17.	Compulsory retirement to facilitate appointment of

local candidates

Schedule—The Constitution

GOVERNMENT OF ZAMBIA

ACT

No. 27 of 1973

Date of Assent: 25th August, 1973

An Act to enact a new Constitution of the Republic of Zambia and to repeal the Zambia Independence Act, 1964, and revoke the Zambia Independence Order, 1964, and the Constitution scheduled thereto, and to provide for matters incidental thereto or connected therewith.

[25th August, 1973

ENACTED by the Parliament of Zambia.

1.	This Act may be cited as the Constitution of Zambia Act, 1973.

2.	(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—

“ Constitution ” means the Constitution set out in the Schedule to this Act;

“ existing law ” means all law, whether a rule of law or a provision of an Act of Parliament or of any other enactment or instrument whatsoever (including any Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or Order of Her Majesty in Council), having effect as part of the law of Zambia or part thereof immediately before the commencement of this Act, and includes any Act of Parliament or statutory instrument made before such commencement and coming into force on such commencement or thereafter.

(2)	Except where the context otherwise requires, words and expressions used in this Act have the same meaning as in the Constitution.

3.	The Zambia Independence Act, 1964, and the Zambia Independence Order, 1964, are repealed and revoked respectively in so far as they form part of the laws of Zambia.

4.	Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Constitution set out in the Schedule to this Act shall come into operation on the commencement of this Act.

5.	The Constitution may be printed and published by the Government Printer separately from this Act, and the production of a copy of the Constitution purporting to be so printed shall be prima facie evidence in all courts and for all purposes whatsoever of the Constitution and its provisions.

6.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and so far as they are not inconsistent with the Constitution, the existing laws shall continue in force after the commencement of this Act as if they had been made in pursuance of the Constitution, but shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with the Constitution.

(2)	The President may by statutory instrument at any time within two years of the commencement of this Act, make such amendment to any existing law as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient for bringing that law into conformity with the provisions of this Act or the Constitution or otherwise forgiving effector enabling effect to be given to those provisions.

(3)	Where any matter that falls to be prescribed or otherwise provided for under the Constitution by Parliament or by any other authority or person is prescribed or provided for by or under any existing law (including any amendment to any such law made under this section) or is otherwise prescribed or provided for immediately before the commencement of this Act by or under the laws repealed or revoked by section three, that prescription or provision shall, as from the commencement of this Act, have effect as if it had been made under the Constitution by Parliament or, as the case may be, the other authority or person.

(4)	The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any powers conferred by this Act or the Constitution upon any person or authority to make provision for any matter, including the amendment or repeal of any existing law.

7.	Where under the existing law any prerogatives or privileges are vested in the President those prerogatives or privileges shall, after the commencement of this Act, continue to vest in the President.

8.	The person holding the office of President immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, unless he ceases to hold office by virtue of the provisions of Article 40 or 41 of the Constitution or resigns, continue in office until the person elected at the first election to the office of President under the provisions of the Constitution assumes office.

9.	(1) Where any office has been established by or under the laws repealed or revoked by section three and the Constitution establishes a similar or an equivalent office, any person who immediately before the commencement of this Act holds or is acting in the former office shall, so far as is consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, be deemed to have been appointed, elected or designated as from the commencement of this Act to hold or to act in the latter office in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and to have taken the oath of allegiance and any other necessary oath under the Constitution:

Provided that any person who, under the laws repealed or revoked under section three or any other existing law, would have been required to vacate his office at the expiration of any period or on the attainment of any age shall vacate his office at the expiration of that period or upon the attainment of that age.

(2)	The President may, at any time after the commencement of this Act, require any person who continues in office by virtue of the provisions of this section to take an oath of allegiance and any oath for the due execution of his office that is prescribed by or under any Act of Parliament.

(3)	The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to—

(a)	the provisions of section ten- and

(b)	any powers conferred by or under the Constitution upon any person or authority to make provision for the abolition of offices or the removal of any person holding or acting in any office.

10.	(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), the National Assembly constituted under the laws repealed or revoked by section three (hereinafter referred to as “ the existing National Assembly ”) shall be the National Assembly during the period beginning on the commencement of this Act and ending on the first dissolution of Parliament thereafter or on the 31st day of December, 1973, whichever is the earlier, and shall be deemed to have been constituted under Part VI of the Constitution.

(2)	The persons who immediately before the commencement of this Act are the elected or nominated members of the existing National Assembly shall continue to be the members of the National Assembly until the first dissolution of Parliament after the commencement of this Act or the 31st day of

December, 1973, whichever is the earlier, and, in the case of elected members, shall be deemed to have been elected to the National Assembly to represent the same constituencies as the constituencies for which they were respectively elected.

(3)	The persons who immediately before the commencement of this Act are the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the existing National Assembly shall continue to be respectively the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly after the commencement of this Act and, as from that date, shall be deemed to have been elected as such in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and shall hold office in accordance with those provisions.

(4)	The rules and orders of the existing National Assembly as in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, until it is otherwise provided for under Article 90 of the Constitution, be the rules of procedure of the National Assembly but shall be construed with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with the Constitution.

(5)	Any person who under this section continues to be the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker or a member of the National Assembly after the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have taken the necessary oath under the Constitution.

(6)	All moneys granted, voted or appropriated by the existing National Assembly in respect of the services of the Republic for the current financial year shall be deemed to have been granted, voted or appropriated by the National Assembly established by Part VI of the Constitution, and in accordance with the Constitution.

11.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Constitution, all property of every nature and kind whatsoever and all assets that immediately before the commencement of this Act were vested in, or held in trust for, the President or in any other person in right of or for the purposes of the Government of Zambia shall after the commencement of this Act continue to be so vested or held in trust, as the case may be.

(2)	The transfer and vesting of all rights, liabilities and obligations to or in the President on behalf of the Government of Zambia by virtue of section twenty of the Zambia Independence Order, 1964, is, for avoidance of any doubt, hereby confirmed.

(3)	Any property which, immediately before the commencement of this Act, was liable to escheat or to be forfeited to the President for the purposes of the Government of Zambia shall, after the commencement of this Act, be liable to escheat or to be forfeited to the President on behalf of the Government of Zambia.

12.	All rights, liabilities and obligations of the President or any public officer on behalf of the Government of Zambia before the commencement of this Act shall, on and after the commencement of this Act, be rights, liabilities and obligations of the President or such public officer, as the case may be, on behalf of the Government of Zambia.

13.	(1) All proceedings that, immediately before the commencement of this Act, are pending before any court established by or under the laws repealed or revoked by section three may be continued and concluded before the corresponding court established by or under the Constitution.

(2)	Any decision given before the commencement of this Act by any such court as aforesaid shall, for the purpose of its enforcement or for the purpose of any appeal therefrom, have effect after the commencement of this Act as if it were a decision of the corresponding court established by or under the Constitution.

14.	(1) All rights and obligations under conventions, treaties or agreements which were exercisable by or binding upon the Government of Zambia immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to be so exercisable and binding.

(2)	All functions which immediately before the commencement of this Act were vested in the President or in any other authority shall, as far as the same continue in existence and are capable of being exercised after the commencement of this Act, be vested in the President or in the authority exercising similar functions under the Constitution, as the case may be, except such functions as are by this Act or any other law vested in some other authority.

15.	(1) Any declaration under section twenty-nine of the existing Constitution in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue in force and shall be deemed to be a declaration made under Article 30 of the Constitution and approved by a resolution of the National Assembly in terms of clause (2) thereof.

(2)	In this section, “ the existing Constitution ” means the Constitution of Zambia in force immediately before the commencement of this Act.

16.	(1) The following provisions of this section shall have effect for the purpose of enabling any officer to whom this section applies or his personal representatives to appeal against a decision to which this section applies, that is to say, a decision within the following classes:

(a)	a decision of the appropriate Commission to give such concurrence as is required by Article 134 of the Constitution in relation to the refusal, withholding, reduction in amount or suspension of any benefits in respect of such an officer’s service as a public officer;

(b)	a decision by any authority to remove such an officer from office if the consequence of the removal is that any benefits cannot be granted in respect of the officer’s service as a public officer;

(c)	a decision by any authority to take some other disciplinary action in relation to such an officer if the consequence of the action is to reduce the amount of any benefits that may be granted in respect of the officer’s service as a public officer.

(2)	Where any decision such as is referred to in subsection (1) is taken by any authority, the authority shall cause to be delivered to the officer concerned, or his personal representatives, a written notice of that decision stating the time, not being less than twenty-eight days from the date on which the notice is delivered, within which he, or his personal representatives, may apply to the authority for the case to be referred to an Appeals Board.

(3)	If application is duly made to an authority within the time stated in such a notice as is mentioned in subsection (2) for a case to be referred to an Appeals Board, the authority shall notify the President in writing of that application and the President shall appoint an Appeals Board for that purpose consisting of—

(а)	one member selected by the President;

(б)	one member selected by an association representative of public officers or a professional body, nominated in either case by the applicant; and

(c)	one member selected by the two other members jointly (or, in default of agreement between those members, by the Chief Justice) who shall be the Chairman of the Board.

(4)	Such an Appeals Board shall inquire into the facts of the case that is referred to it, and for that purpose the Board—

(а)	shall, if the applicant so requests in writing, hear the applicant either in person or by a legal representative of his choice, according to the terms of the request;

(б)	may hear any other person who, in the opinion of the

Board, is able to give the Board information on the case; and

(c)	shall have access to, and shall consider, all documents that were available to the authority concerned, and shall also consider any further document relating to the case that may be produced by or on behalf of the applicant or the authority.

(5)	When such an Appeals Board has completed its consideration of the case, then—

(a)	if the decision that is the subject of the reference to the Board is a decision such as is mentioned in

paragraph (a) of subsection (1), the Board shall advise the appropriate Commission whether the decision should be affirmed, reversed or modified and the Commission shall act in accordance with that advice;

(6)	if the decision that is the subject of the reference to the Board is a decision such as is mentioned in paragraph (b) or (c) of subsection (1), the Board shall not have power to advise the authority responsible for making the decision to affirm, reverse or modify the decision but the Board may advise the authority responsible for granting the benefits in question—

(i)	where the officer has been removed from office, to grant all or part of the benefits for which the officer concerned would have been eligible under any law if he had retired voluntarily at the date of the dismissal; or

(ii)	where some other disciplinary action has been taken in relation to the officer, that on the grant of any benefits under any law in respect of the officer’s service such benefits shall be increased by such amount, or shall be calculated in such manner, as the Board may specify in order to offset all or any part of the reduction in the amount of such benefits that, in the opinion of the Board, would or might otherwise be a consequence of the action;

and that authority shall act in accordance with that advice and the provisions of that law shall have effect accordingly,

(6)	In this section—

“ the appropriate Commission ” has the meaning assigned to it in Article 134 (3) of the Constitution;

“ pensions benefits ” has the meaning assigned to it in Article 133 (5) of the Constitution.

(7)	This section applies to any officer who on 24th October, 1964, was on pensionable conditions of service and—

(а)	was designated under the Overseas Aid Scheme; or

(б)	was immediately before 24th October, 1964, a member

of Her Majesty’s Overseas Civil Service or Her Majesty’s Overseas Judiciary; or

(c)	whose conditions of service included an entitlement ,o free overseas passages from Zambia for the purpose of leave of absence upon the completion of a tour of duty; or

(d)	was not a citizen of Zambia.

17.	(1) If the President so requests, the appropriate Commission shall consider whether there are more local candidates suitably qualified for appointment to, or promotion in, any branch of the service for which the Commission is responsible than there are vacancies in that branch that could appropriately be filled by such local candidates; and the Commission, if satisfied that such is the case, shall, if so requested by the President, select officers in that branch to whom this section applies and whose retirement would in the opinion of the Commission cause vacancies that could appropriately be filled by such suitably qualified local candidates as are available and fit for appointment and inform the President of the number of officers so selected; and if the President specifies a number of officers to be called upon to retire (not exceeding the number of officers so selected), the Commission shall nominate that number of officers from among the officers so selected and by notice in writing require them to retire from the public service; and any officer who is so required to retire shall retire accordingly.

(2)	Any notice given under subsection (1) requiring any officer to retire from the public service shall—

(a)	in the case of an officer who, when he receives the notice, is on leave of absence upon the completion of a tour of duty, specify the date upon which he shall so retire which shall be not earlier than the expiration of six months from the date when he receives the notice or, if his leave of absence would otherwise expire later, when it would otherwise expire; and

(b)	in the case of any other officer, specify the period, which shall be not less than six months from the date when he receives the notice, at the expiration of which he shall proceed upon leave of absence pending retirement :

Provided that, with the consent of the officer, the notice may specify an earlier date or, as the case may be, a shorter period.

(3)	An officer to whom this section applies shall not be compulsorily retired from the public service for the purpose of facilitating the appointment of local candidates except in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(4)	This section applies to any overseas officer who, after the commencement of this Act, is appointed to any public office and who is notified at the time of his appointment that this section will apply to him.

(5)	In this section—

(a)	“ overseas officer ” means an officer in the public service who is, either individually or as a member of a class, declared by the appropriate Commission to be an overseas officer;

(b)	“ the appropriate Commission ” has the meaning assigned thereto in Article 134 (3) of the Constitution.

(6)	Notwithstanding the revocation of the Zambia Independence Order, 1964, the provisions of section sixteen thereof shall continue to apply to any officer who was appointed to the office in question and to whom they applied prior to the commencement of this Act, and the foregoing subsections of this section shall not apply to any such officer.

A Hide. 1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20. 21. 22. 23.

SCHEDULE (Sections 2 and 4)

CONSTITUTION OF ZAMBIA

PREAMBLE

Arrangement of Articles

PART I

National Sovereignty and the State

Declaration of Republic Public Seal

National Anthem and National Emblem One political Party

PART II Citizenship Citizens of Zambia Children of citizens of Zambia Children of established residents

Persons entitled to apply to be registered or confirmed as citizens

Powers of Parliament

Citizenship Board

Cesser of citizenship

Interpretation

PART III

Protection of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of Individuals

Fundamental rights and freedoms

Protection of right to life

Protection of right to personal liberty

Protection from slavery and forced labour

Protection from inhuman treatment

Protection from deprivation of propert}'

Protection for privacy of home and other property

Provisions to secure protection of law

Protection of freedom of conscience

Protection of freedom of expression

Protection of freedom of assembly and association

Article

24.	Protection of freedom of movement

25.	Protection from discrimination on the grounds of race,

etc.

26.	Derogation from fundamental rights and freedoms

27.	Provisions relating to restriction and detention

28.	Reference of certain matters to special tribunal

29.	Enforcement of protective provisions

30.	Declarations relating to emergencies or threatened

emergencies

31.	Interpretation and savings

PART IV

Leadebship Code

32.	Leadership Committee

33.	Leadership Code

34.	Consequences of non-compliance or breach

35.	Tribunal and appeals

36.	Rules of the Leadership Committee

PART V The Executive The President

37.	The office of President

38.	Election of President

39.	Tenure of office of President

40.	Removal of President on grounds of incapacity

41.	Removal of President for violation of Constitution or

gross misconduct

42.	Vacancy in office of President

43.	Discharge of functions of President during illness, etc.

44.	Oath of President

45.	Returning officer at elections of President

46.	Salary and allowances of President

47.	Protection of President in respect of legal proceedings

The Prime Minister and the Cabinet

48.	Prime Minister, Ministers and Junior Ministers

49.	Inability of Prime Minister to discharge functions

50.	Cabinet

51.	Oaths to be taken by Secretary-General of the Party,

Prime Minister, Ministers and Junior Ministers

52.	Secretary to Cabinet

Article

Executive Functions

53.	Functions of President

54.	Command of armed forces

55.	Functions of Prime Minister

56.	Functions of Cabinet, Ministers and Junior Ministers

57.	Attorney-General

58.	Director of Public Prosecutions

59.	Tenure of office of Director of Public Prosecutions

60.	Prerogative of mercy

61.	Advisory committee

62.	Constitution of offices

PART VI Parliament Composition

63.	Legislative power

64.	Composition of National Assembly

65.	Elected members

66.	Nominated members

67.	Qualifications for election or nomination to National

Assembly

68.	Disqualification for election or nomination to National

Assembly

69.	Speaker

70.	Deputy Speaker

71.	Tenure of office of members of National Assembly

72.	The franchise

73.	Electoral Commission

74.	Constituencies and elections

75.	Primary elections

76.	Nomination for election to National Assembly

77.	Determination of questions as to membership of

National Assembly

78.	Clerk and staff of National Assembly

Legislation and Procedure in National Assembly

79.	Exercise of legislative power of Parliament

80.	Alteration of Constitution

81.	Statutory instruments

82.	Restriction with regard to certain financial measures

Article

83.	President may address National Assembly

84.	Oaths to be taken by Speaker and members

85.	Presiding in National Assembly

86.	Quorum in National Assembly

87.	Freedom of speech and voting

88.	Voting in National Assembly

89.	Unqualified persons sitting or voting

90.	Procedure in National Assembly

91.	Privileges and immunities of National Assembly and

members

Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliament

92.	Summoning of Parliament

93.	Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament

94.	Sittings of National Assembly

PART VII The House of Chiefs

95.	Composition of House of Chiefs

96.	Functions of House of Chiefs

97.	Election of members to represent Provinces

98.	Chairman of House of Chiefs

99.	Vice-Chairman of House of Chiefs

100.	Oaths of members of House of Chiefs

101.	Presiding in House of Chiefs

102.	Quorum in House of Chiefs

103.	Meetings of House of Chiefs

104.	Attendance of President and other persons at House of

Chiefs

105.	Procedure in House of Chiefs

106.	President may make regulations

PART VIII The Judicature The Supreme Court and High Court

107.	Supreme Court

108.	Appointment of judges of Supreme Court

109.	High Court

110.	Appointment of judges of High Court

111.	Acting judge to act until appointment expires or if

revoked

112.	Qualifications for appointment as judge

Article

113.	Tenure of office of judges of Supreme Court and High

Court

114.	Oaths to be taken by judge

Judicial Service Commission

115.	Judicial Service Commission

116.	Appointment, etc., of judicial officers

PART IX

Commission fob Investigations

117.	The Commission for Investigations

118.	Members of the Commission

119.	Powers and procedure

PART X Finance

120.	Imposition of taxation

121.	Withdrawal of moneys from general revenues

122.	Supplementary estimates in respect of expenditure

authorised by warrant

123.	Appropriation and Supplementary Appropriation Acts

124.	Financial report

125.	Remuneration of certain officers

126.	Public debt

127.	Defence and special expenditure

128.	Auditor-General

129.	Tenure of office of Auditor-General

PART XI

Service Commissions

130.	Service Commissions

131.	Provisions applicable to all Commissions

132.	Appointment, etc., of public officers

133.	Pensions laws and protection of pensions rights

134.	Power of Commissions in relation to pensions, etc.

PART XII

Miscellaneous

135.	Performance of functions of Commissions

136.	Resignations

137.	Reappointments and concurrent appointments

138.	Interpretation

Schedule—Election of Members of House of Chiefs to represent Provinces

CONSTITUTION OF ZAMBIA PREAMBLE

We, the People op Zambta, by our representatives assembled in our Parliament, having established a One-Party Participatory Democracy under the Philosophy of Humanism;

In pursuance of our determination to xiphoid our inherent and inviolable right to decide, appoint and proclaim the means and style whereby we shall govern ourselves as a united and indivisible Sovereign State under the banner of our motto “ One Zambia, One Nation

Proceeding from the base that all men have the right freely to determine and build their own political, economic and social system by ways and means of their own free choice;

Determined to ensure the rights of all men to participate fully and without hindrance in the affairs of their own government and in shaping the destiny of their own motherland;

Recognising that individual rights of citizens including freedom, justice, liberty and equality are founded on the realisation of the rights and duties of all men in the protection of life, liberty and property, freedom of conscience, expression and association within the context of our National Constitution;

Pledging to all citizens the bounden duty of the State to respect the rights and dignity of all men, to uphold the laws of the State, and to conduct the affairs of the State in such a manner that its resources are preserved, developed and enjoyed for the benefit of its citizens as a whole and so as to prevent the exploitation of man by man;

In the hope that we may by our action enhance the development of Pan-Africanism, African Unity, independence and the total liberation of Africa, and further strive to foster the development of non-alignment and all other forms of international co-operation conducive to the consolidation of peace and the strengthening of mutual respect and friendship among peoples and States;

Do hereby Enact and Give to Ourselves this Constitution.

PART I

National Sovereignty and the State

1.	Zambia is a sovereign Republic.

2.	The Public Seal of the Republic shall be such device as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

3.	The National Anthem and the National Emblem shall be such as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

4.	(1) There shall be one and only one political party or-organisation in Zambia, namely, the United National Independence Party (in this Constitution referred to as “ the Party ”),. the constitution whereof is annexed hereto for information.

(2)	Nothing contained in this Constitution shall be so-construed as to entitle any person lawfully to form or attempt to form any political party or organisation other than the Party, or to belong to, assemble or associate with, or express opinion or do any other thing in sympathy with, such political party or organisation.

PART II

Citizenship

5.	(1) Every person who immediately before the commence ment of this Constitution was a citizen of Zambia shall continue to be a citizen of Zambia after the commencement of this Constitution.

(2)	For the purposes of this Article “ a person who immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was a citizen of Zambia ” includes a person who was granted citizenship of Zambia subject to the performance of any conditions following the happening of a future event, and any such conditions shall cease to be of any force or effect.

6.	A person born in or outside Zambia after the commencement of this Constitution shall become a citizen of Zambia at the date of his birth if on that date at least one of his parents is a citizen of Zambia.

7.	(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (2), a person bom in Zambia after the commencement of this Constitution whose father is an established resident shall become a citizen of Zambia at the time of his birth.

(2)	Any such person shall cease to be a citizen of Zambia upon attaining the age of twenty-two years unless—

(а)	he, after attaining the age of twenty-one years, makes-

application to the Citizenship Board, in such manner-as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, for the confirmation of his citizenship and such application is granted; and

(б)	he renounces his citizenship, if any, of a country other-

than Zambia within three months of his being notified that his application for the confirmation of his citizenship has been granted.

(3)	The provisions of clause (2) shall not apply to any person who, under the law of any country other than Zambia, is, on

attaining the age of twenty-one years, not a citizen, and is not or was not at any time before that age entitled to be registered as a citizen, of that country.

8.	(1) The following persons shall be entitled to apply to the Citizenship Board, in such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, to be registered as citizens of Zambia, or for the confirmation of citizenship, as the case may be:

(a)	any person to whom Article 7 (2) applies;

(b)	any woman who is or has been married to a citizen of Zambia and has been ordinarily resident in Zambia for a continuous period of not less than three years after such marriage and immediately preceding her application for registration; or

(c)	any person who—

(i)	has attained the age of twenty-one years or is a woman who is or has been married; and

(ii)	has been ordinarily resident in Zambia for a continuous period of not less than ten years immediately preceding that person’s application for registration.

(2)	An application for registration as a citizen under this Article shall not be made by or on behalf of any person who, under any law in force in Zambia, is adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind.

(3)	Parliament may provide that any period during which a person has the right to reside in Zambia by virtue only of a permit issued under the authority of any law relating to immigration shall not be taken into account in computing the period of ten years mentioned in clause (1) (c) (ii).

9.	Parliament may make provision for—

(a)	the acquisition of citizenship of Zambia by persons who are not eligible to become citizens of Zambia under the provisions of this Part;

(b)	depriving any person of his citizenship of Zambia:

Provided that a person who is a citizen—

(i)	by virtue of Article 5 and was a citizen of Zambia before the commencement of this Constitution otherwise than by registration or naturalisation;

(ii)	by virtue of Article 6; or

(iii)	by virtue of Article 7 (1) read with Article 7 (3);

shall not bo deprived of his citizenship of Zambia except upon the ground that he is a citizen of a country other than Zambia; and

(c)	the renunciation by any person of his citizenship of Zambia.

10.	Parliament may make provisions for the establishment of a Citizenship Board to deal with any of the matters falling under the provisions of Article 7, 8 or 9.

11.	(1) A citizen of Zambia shall cease to be such a citizen if at any time he acquires the citizenship of a country other than Zambia by voluntary act other than marriage or does any act indicating his intention to adopt or make use of such other citizenship.

(2)	A person who is a citizen of Zambia by virtue of Article 7 (1) read with Article 7 (3) shall cease to be such a citizen if at any time he acquires, otherwise than by voluntary act, the citizenship of a country other than Zambia and has not, within one year of acquiring that citizenship, renounced his citizenship of that country, taken the oath of allegiance and made and registered such declaration of his intention concerning residence as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(3)	A person who—

(а)	becomes a citizen of Zambia by registration; and

(б)	is, immediately after he becomes a citizen of Zambia, also a citizen of some other country;

shall, subject to the provisions of clause (5), cease to be a citizen of Zambia at the expiration of three months after he becomes a citizen of Zambia unless he has renounced the citizenship of that other country, taken the oath of allegiance and made and registered such declaration of his intention concerning residence as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(4)	For the purposes of this Article, where, under the law of a country other than Zambia, a person cannot renounce his citizenship of that other country, he need not make such renunciation but he may instead be required to make such declaration concerning that citizenship as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(5)	Provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament for extending the period within which any person may make a renunciation of citizenship, take an oath or make or register a declaration for the purposes of this Article, and if such provision is made that person shall cease to be a citizen of Zambia only if at the expiration of the extended period he has

not then made the renunciation, taken the oath or made or registered the declaration, as the case may be.

12.	(1) For the purposes of this Part, a person bom aboard a registered ship or aircraft, or aboard an unregistered ship or aircraft of the Government of any country, shall be deemed to have been bom in the place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case may be, in that country.

(2)	Any reference in this Part to the national status of the parent of a person at the time of that person’s birth shall, in relation to a person born after the death of his parent, be construed as a reference to the national status of the parent at the time of the parent’s death.

(3)	For the purposes of this Part—

“ the Citizenship Board ” means the Citizenship Board established by or under an Act of Parliament;

“ established resident ” means, in relation to any date, a person who is not a citizen of Zambia or a prohibited immigrant under any law and who has been ordinarily and lawfully resident in Zambia for the period of four years immediately preceding that date:

Provided that no period during which a person—

(i)	has been confined in a prison consequent on a sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court, which sentence has not on appeal or review been quashed or varied to a fine;

(ii)	has been an inmate of a mental institution; or

(iii)	has remained in Zambia as a visitor or in terms of a statutory permit allowing such person for a limited period only so to remain;

shall be counted for the purpose of this definition.

PART III

Protection of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the Individual

13.	It is recognised and declared that every person in Zambia has been and shall continue to be entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to the limitations contained in Article 4 and in this Part, to each and all of the following, namely—

(а)	life, liberty, security of the person and the protection

of the law;

(б)	freedom of conscience, expression, assembly and

association; and

(c)	protection for the privacy of his home and other property and from deprivation of property without compensation;

and the provisions of this Part shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in Article 4 and in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.

14.	(1) No person shall be deprived of his life intentionally save in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence under the law in force in Zambia of which he has been convicted.

(2)	Without prejudice to any liability for a contravention of any other law with respect to the use of force in such cases as are hereinafter mentioned, a person shall not be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contravention of this Article if he dies as the result of the use of force to such extent as is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of the case—

(a)	for the defence of any person from violence or for the

defence of property;

(b)	in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person lawfully detained;

(c)	for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrection or

mutiny; or

(d)	in order to prevent the commission by that person of

a criminal offence;

or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.

15.	(1) No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty save as may be authorised by law in any of the following cases, that is to say—

(a)	in execution of the sentence or order of a court, whether established for Zambia or some other country, in respect of a criminal offence of which he has been convicted;

(b)	in execution of the order of a court of record punishing

him for contempt of that court or of a court inferior to it;

(c)	in execution of the order of a court made to secure the fulfilment of any obligation imposed on him by law;

(d)	for the purpose of bringing him before a court in

execution of the order of a court;

(e)	upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or being about to commit, a criminal offence under the law in force in Zambia;

(/) under the order of a court or with the consent of his parent or guardian, for his education or welfare during any period ending not later than the date when he attains the age of eighteen years;

{g) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an infectious or contagious disease;

{h) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of unsound mind, addicted to drugs or alcohol, or a vagrant, for the purpose of his care or treatment or the protection of the community;

(i)	for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of

that person into Zambia, or for the purpose of effecting the expulsion, extradition or other lawful removal of that person from Zambia or for the purpose of restricting that person while he is being conveyed through Zambia in the course of his extradition or removal as a convicted prisoner from one country to another; or

(j)	to such extent as may be necessary in the execution of a lawful order requiring that person to remain within a specified area within Zambia or prohibiting him from being within such an area, or to such extent as may be reasonably justifiable for the taking of proceedings against that person relating to the making of any such order, or to such extent as may be reasonably justifiable for restraining that person during any visit that he is permitted to make to any part of Zambia in which, in consequence of any such order, his presence would otherwise be unlawful,

(2)	Any person who is arrested or detained shall be informed as soon as reasonably practicable, in a language that he understands, of the reasons for his arrest or detention.

(3)	Any person who is arrested or detained—

(a)	for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution of the order of a court; or

(b)	upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or

being about to commit, a criminal offence under the law in force in Zambia;

and who is not released, shall be brought without undue delay before a court; and if any person arrested or detained as mentioned in paragraph (b) is not tried within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any further proceedings that may be brought against him, he shall be released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to trial.

(4)	Any person who is unlawfully arrested or detained by any other person shall be entitled to compensation therefor from that other person.

16.	(1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude.

(2)	No person shall be required to perform forced labour.

(3)	For the purposes of this Article, the expression “ forced labour ” does not include—

(a)	any labour required in consequence of the sentence or

order of a court;

(b)	labour required of any person while he is lawfully

detained that, though not required in consequence of the sentence or order of a court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or for the maintenance of the place at which he is detained;

(c)	any labour required of a member of a disciplined force

in pursuance of his duties as such or, in the case of a person who has conscientious objections to service as a member of a naval, military or air force, any labour that that person is required by law to perform in place of such service;

(id) any labour required during any period when the Republic is at war or a declaration under Article 30 is in force or in the event of any other emergency or calamity that threatens the life and well-being of the community, to the extent that the requiring of such labour is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of any situation arising or existing during that period or as a result of that other emergency or calamity, for the purpose of dealing with that situation; or

(e)	any labour reasonably required as part of reasonable and normal communal or other civic obligations.

17.	(1) No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other treatment.

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question authorises the infliction of any description of punishment that was lawful in Zambia immediately before the coming into operation of this Constitution.

18.	(1) Save as hereinafter provided, no property of any description shall be compulsorily taken possession of, and no interest in or right over property of any description shall be compulsorily acquired, except under the authority of an Act of Parliament which provides for payment of compensation for the property or interest or right to be taken possession of or acquired.

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of clause (1) to the extent that it is shown that such law provides for the taking possession or acquisition of any property or interest therein or right thereover—

(a)	in satisfaction of any tax, rate or due;

(b)	by way of penalty for breach of any law, whether under civil process or after conviction of an offence;

(c)	in execution of judgments or orders of courts;

(d)	upon the attempted removal of the property in

question out of or into Zambia in contravention of

any law;

(«) as an incident of a contract (including a lease, tenancy, mortgage, charge, pledge or bill of sale) or of a title deed to land;

(/) for the purpose of its administration, care or custody on behalf of and for the benefit of the person entitled to the beneficial interest therein;

(g)	by way of the vesting of enemy property or for the purpose of the administration of such property;

(h)	for the purpose of—

(i)	the administration of the property of a deceased person, a person of unsound mind or a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years, for the benefit of the persons entitled to the beneficial interest therein;

(ii)	the administration of the property of a person adjudged bankrupt or a body corporate in liquidation, for the benefit of the creditors of such bankrupt or body corporate and, subject thereto, for the benefit of other persons entitled to the beneficial interest in the property;

(iii)	the administration of the property of a person who has entered into a deed of arrangement for the benefit of his creditors; or

(iv)	vesting any property subject to a trust in persons appointed as trustees under the instrument creating the trust or by a court or, by order of a court, for the purpose of giving effect to the trust;

(i)	in consequence of any law relating to the limitation of actions;

(j)	in terms of any law relating to abandoned, unoccupied,

unutilised or undeveloped land, as defined in such law;

(k)	in terms of any law relating to absent or non-resident

owners, as defined in such law, of any property;

(l)	in terms of any law relating to trusts or settlements;

(to) by reason of the property in question being in a dangerous state or prejudicial to the health or safety of human beings, animals or plants;

(n)	as a condition in connection with the granting of permission for the utilisation of that or other property in any particular manner;

(o)	for the purpose of or in connection with the pros-

pecting for or exploitation of minerals belonging to the Republic on terms which provide for the respective interests of the persons alfected;

(p)	in pursuance of provision for the marketing of property

of that description in the common interests of the various persons otherwise entitled to dispose of that property;

(q)	by way of the taking of a sample for the purposes of

any law;

(r)	by way of the acquisition of the shares, or a class of

shares, in a body corporate on terms agreed to by the holders of not less than nine-tenths in value of those shares or that class thereof;

{s) where the property consists of an animal, upon its being found trespassing or straying;

(t)	for so long as may be necessary for the purpose of any

examination, investigation, trial or inquiry or, in the case of land, the carrying out thereon—

(i)	of work for the purpose of the conservation of natural resources of any description; or

(ii)	of agricultural development or improvement which the owner or occupier of the land has been required, and has without reasonable and lawful excuse refused or failed, to carry out;

(u)	where the property consists of any licence or permit;

(v)	where the property consists of wild animals existing in

their natural habitat or the carcasses of wild animals;

(w)	where the property is held by a body corporate established by law for public purposes and in which no moneys have been invested other than moneys provided by Parliament;

(x)	where the property is any mineral, mineral oil or natural gases or of any rights accruing by virtue of any title or licence for the purpose of searching for or mining any mineral, mineral oil or natural gases—

(i)	upon failure to comply with any provision of such law relating to the title or licence or to the exercise of the rights accruing or to the development or exploitation of any mineral, mineral oil or natural gases; or

(ii)	in terms of any law vesting any such property or rights in the President;

(y)	for the purpose of the administration or disposition of such property or interest or right by the President in implementation of a comprehensive land policy or of a policy designed to ensure that the statute law, the Common Law and the doctrines of equity relating to or affecting the interests in or rights over land, or any other interests or rights, enjoyed by Chiefs and persons claiming through or under them shall apply with substantial uniformity throughout Zambia;

(z)	in terms of any law providing for the conversion of

titles to land from freehold to leasehold and the imposition of any restriction on subdivision, assignment or sub-letting;

(aa)	in terms of any law relating to—

(i)	the forfeiture or confiscation of the property of a person who has left Zambia for the purpose, or apparent purpose, of defeating the ends of justice;

(ii) the imposition of a fine on, and the forfeiture or confiscation of the property of, a person who admits a contravention of any law relating to the imposition or collection of any duty or tax or to the prohibition or control of dealings or transactions in gold, currencies or securities.

(3)	An Act of Parliament such as is referred to in clause (1) shall, inter alia—

(а)	provide that compensation shall be paid in money;

(б)	specify the principles on which the compensation is to be determined; and

(c)	provide that the amount of the compensation shall in default of agreement be determined by resolution of the National Assembly.

(4)	No compensation determined by the National Assembly in terms of any such law as is referred to in clauses (1) and (3) shall be called in question in any court on the grounds that such compensation is not adequate.

19.	(1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be subjected to the search of his person or his property or the entry by others on his premises.

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question makes provision—

(a) that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, public health, town and country planning, the development and utilisation of mineral resources, or in order to secure the development or utilisation of any property for a purpose beneficial to the community;

(6) that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons;

(c)	that authorises an officer or agent of the Government,

a local government authority or a body corporate established by law for a public purpose to enter on the premises of any person in order to inspect those premises or anything thereon for the purpose of any tax, rate or due or in order to carry out work connected with any property that is lawfully on those premises and that belongs to that Government, authority or body corporate, as the case may be; or

(d)	that authorises, for the purpose of enforcing the judgment or order of a court in any civil proceedings, the search of any person or property by order of a court or entry upon any premises by such order;

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.

20.	(1) If any person is charged with a criminal offence, then, unless the charge is withdrawn, the case shall be afforded a fair hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established by law.

(2) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence—

(a)	shall be presumed to be innocent until he is proved or has pleaded guilty;

(b)	shall be informed as soon as reasonably practicable, in a language that he understands and in detail, of the nature of the offence charged;

(c)	shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation of his defence;

(d)	shall be permitted to defend himself before the court in person or, at his own expense, by a legal representative of his own choice;

(e)	shall be afforded facilities to examine in person or by his legal representative the witnesses called by the prosecution before the court, and to obtain the attendance and carry out the examination of witnesses to testify on his behalf before the court on the same conditions as those applying to witnesses called by the prosecution; and

(/) shall be permitted to have without payment the assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand the language used at the trial of the charge;

and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence.

(3)	When a person is tried for any criminal olfence, the accused person or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall, if he so requires and subject to pa3rment of such reasonable fee as may be prescribed by law, be given within a reasonable time after judgment a copy for the use of the accused person of any record of the proceedings made by or on behalf of the court.

(4)	No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal offence on account of any act or omission that did not, at the time it took place, constitute such an offence, and no penalty shall be imposed for any criminal offence that is severer in degree or description than the maximum penalty that might have been imposed for that offence at the time when it was committed.

(5)	No person who shows that he has been tried by a competent court for a criminal offence and either convicted or acquitted shall again be tried for that offence or for any other criminal offence of which he could have been convicted at the trial for that offence, save upon the order of a superior court in the course of appeal or review proceedings relating to the conviction or acquittal.

(6)	No person shall be tried for a criminal offence if he shows that he has been pardoned for that offence.

(7)	No person who is tried for a criminal offence shall be compelled to give evidence at the trial.

(8)	No person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless that offence is defined and the penalty therefor is prescribed in a written law:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent a court of record from punishing any person for contempt of itself notwithstanding that the act or omission constituting the contempt is not defined in a written law and the penalty therefor is not so prescribed.

(9)	Any court or other adjudicating authority prescribed by law for the determination of the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation shall be established by law and shall be independent and impartial; and where proceedings for such a determination are instituted by any person before such a court or other adjudicating authority, the case shall be given a fair hearing within a reasonable time.

(10)	Except with the agreement of all the parties thereto, all proceedings of every court and proceedings for the determination of the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation before any other adj udicating authority, including the announcement of the decision of the court or other authority, shall be held in public.

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

(11)	Nothing in the last foregoing clause shall prevent the court or other adjudicating authority from excluding from the proceedings persons other than the parties thereto and their legal representatives to such extent as the court or other authority—

(а)	may consider necessary or expedient in circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice or in interlocutory proceedings; or

(б)	may be empowered by law to do so in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, the welfare of persons under the age of eighteen years or the protection of the private lives of persons concerned in the proceedings.

(12)	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of—

(a)	clause (2) (a) to the extent that it is shown that the-law in question imposes upon any person charged with a criminal offence the burden of proving particular facts;

(b)	clause (2) (d) to the extent that it is shown that the law in question prohibits legal representation before a subordinate court in proceedings for an offence under African customary law (being proceedings against any person who, under that law, is subject to that law);

(c)	clause (2) (e) to the extent that it is shown that the law in question imposes reasonable conditions that must be satisfied if witnesses called to testify on behalf of an accused person are to be paid their expenses out of public funds;

(d)	clause (2) to the extent that it is shown that the law provides that—

(i)	where the trial of any person for any offence prescribed by or under the law has been adjourned and the accused, having pleaded to the charge, fails to appear at the time fixed by the court for the resumption of his trial after the adjournment, the proceedings may continue notwithstanding the absence of the accused if the court, being satisfied that, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it is reasonable so to do, so orders; and

(ii)	the court shall set aside any conviction or sentence pronounced in the absence of the accused in respect of that offence if the accused satisfies the court without undue delay that the cause of his absence was reasonable and that he had a valid defence to the charge;

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(e)	clause (2) to the extent that it is shown that the law provides that the trial of a body corporate may take place in the absence of any representative of the body corporate upon a charge in respect of which a plea of not guilty has been entered by the court;

(/) clause (5) to the extent that it is shown that the law in question authorises a court to try a member of a disciplined force for a criminal offence notwithstanding any trial and conviction or acquittal of that member under the disciplinary law of that force, so, however, that any court so trying such a member and convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment take into account any punishment awarded him under that disciplinary law.

(13)	In the case of any person who is held in lawful detention, the provisions of clauses (1), (2) (d) and (e), and (3) shall not apply in relation to his trial for a criminal offence under the law regulating the discipline of persons held in such detention.

(14)	In its application to a body corporate clause (2) shall have effect as if the words “ in person or ” were omitted from paragraphs (d) and (e).

(15)	In this Article “criminal offence” means a criminal offence under the law in force in Zambia.

21.	(1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of conscience, and for the purposes of this Article the said freedom includes freedom of thought and of religion, freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others, and both in public and in private, to manifest and propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and observance.

(2)	Except with his own consent (or, if he is a minor, the consent of his guardian) no person attending any place of education shall be required to receive religious instruction or to take part in or attend any religious ceremony or observance if that instruction, ceremony or observance relates to a religion other than his own.

(3)	No religious community or denomination shall be prevented from providing religious instruction for persons of that community or denomination in the course of any education provided by that community or denomination.

(4)	No person shall be compelled to take any oath which is contrary to his religion or belief or to take any oath in a manner which is contrary to his religion or belief.

(5)	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of

this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question makes provision which is reasonably required—

(o)	in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or

(6)	for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons, including the right to observe and practise any religion without the unsolicited intervention of members of any other religion;

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.

22.	(1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of expression, that is to say, freedom to hold opinions without interference, freedom to receive ideas and information without interference, freedom to communicate ideas and information without interference (whether the communication be to the public generally or to any person or class of persons) and freedom from interference with his correspondence.

(2)	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question makes provision—

(а)	that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; or

(б)	that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the reputations, rights and freedoms of other persons or the private lives of persons concerned in legal proceedings, preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of the courts, regulating educational institutions in the interests of persons receiving instruction therein, or regulating the technical administration or the technical operation of telephony, telegraphy, posts, wireless broadcasting or television; or

(c)	that imposes restrictions upon public officers;

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.

23.	(1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom of assembly and association, that is to say, his right to assemble freely and associate with other persons and in particular to form or belong to trade unions or other associations for the protection of his interests.

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question makes provision—

(a)	that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health;

(b)	that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the rights or freedoms of other persons;

(c)	that imposes restrictions upon public officers; or

(d)	for the registration of trade unions in a register established by or under a law and for imposing reasonable conditions relating to the procedure for entry on such a register (including conditions as to the minimum number of persons necessary to constitute a trade union qualified for registration);

and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.

(2)	Any restriction on a person’s freedom of movement that is involved in his lawful detention shall not be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article.

(3)	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question makes provision—

(а)	for the imposition of restrictions that are reasonably required in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health or the imposition of restrictions on the acquisition or use by any person of land or other property in Zambia, and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society;

(б)	for the imposition of restrictions on the freedom of movement of any person who is not a citizen of Zambia;

(c) for the imposition of restrictions upon the movement or residence within Zambia of public officers; or

24.	(1) No person snail be deprived of his freedom of movement, and for the purposes of this Article the said freedom means the right to move freely throughout Zambia, the right to reside in any part of Zambia, the right to enter Zambia and immunity from expulsion from Zambia.

(cl) for the removal of a person from Zambia to be tried outside Zambia for a criminal offence or to undergo imprisonment in some other country in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence under the law in force in Zambia of which he has been convicted.

Protection

from

discrimination on the grounds of race, etc.

25.	(I) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4), (5; and (7), no law shall make any provision that is discriminator}' either of itself or in its effect.

(2)	Subject- to the provisions of clauses (6), (7) and (8), no person shall be treated in a discriminatory manner by any person acting by virtue of any written law or in the performance of the functions of any public office or any public authority.

(3)	In this Article, the expression “ discriminatory ” means affording different treatment to different persons attributable wholly or mainly to their respective descriptions by race, tribe, place of origin, political opinions, colour or creed whereby persons of one such description are subjected to disabilities or restrictions to which persons of another such description are not made subject or are accorded privileges or advantages which are not accorded to persons of another such description.

(4)	Clause ( L) shall not apply to any law so far as that law makes provision—

(a)	for the appropriation of the general revenues of the Republic;

(b)	with respect to persons who are not citizens of Zambia;

(c)	with respect to adoption, marriage, divorce, burial,

devolution of property on death or other matters of personal law;

(d)	for the application in the case of members of a particular race or tribe of customary law with respect to any matter to the exclusion of any law with respect to that matter which is applicable in the case of other persons; or

(e)	whereby persons of any such description as is men-

tioned in clause (3) may be subjected to any disability or restriction or may be accorded any privilege or advantage which, having regard to its nature and to special circumstances pertaining to those persons or to persons of any other such description, is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.

(5)	Nothing contained in any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of clause (1) to the extent that it is shown that it makes reasonable provision with respect to qualifications for service as a public officer or as a member of a disciplined force or for the service of a local government authority or a body corporate established directly by any law.

(6)	Clause (2) shall not apply to anything which is expressly or by necessary implication authorised to be done by any such provision of law as is referred to in clause (4) or (5).

(7)	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this Article to the extent that it is shown that the law in question makes provision whereby persons of any such description as is mentioned in clause (3) may be subjected to any restriction on the rights and freedoms guaranteed by Articles 19. 21, 22, 23 and 24, being such a restriction as is authorised by Article 19 (2), 21 (5), 22 (2), 23 (2) or 24 (3), as the case may be.

(8)	Nothing in clause (2) shall affect any discretion relating to the institution, conduct or discontinuance of civil or criminal proceedings in any court that is vested in any person by or under this Constitution or any other law.

26.	Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of Article 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24 or 25 to the extent that it is shown that the law in question authorises the taking, during any period when the Republic is at war or when a declaration under Article 30 is in force, of measures for the purpose of dealing with any situation existing or arising during that period; and nothing done by any person under the authority of any such law shall be held to be in contravention of any of the said provisions unless it is shown that the measures taken exceeded anything which, having due regard to the circumstances prevailing at the time, could reasonably have been thought to be required for the purpose of dealing with the situation in question.

27.	(1) Where a person’s freedom of movement is restricted, or he is detained, under the authority of any such law as is referred to in Article 24 or 26, as the case may be, the following provisions shall apply:

(a)	he shall, as soon as is reasonably practicable and in

any case not more than fourteen days after the commencement of his detention or restriction, be furnished with a statement in writing in a language that he understands specifying in detail the grounds upon which he is restricted or detained;

(b)	not more than one month after the commencement of

his restriction or detention a notification shall be published in the Gazette stating that he has been restricted or detained and giving particulars of the provision of law under which his restriction or detention is authorised;

(c)	if he so requests at any time during the period of such restriction or detention not earlier than one year

after the commencement thereof or after he last made such a request during that period, as the case may be, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law and presided over by a person, appointed by the Chief Justice, who is or is qualified to be a judge of the High Court;

(d)	he shall be afforded reasonable facilities to consult a legal representative of his own choice who shall be permitted to make representations to the authority by which tho restriction or detention was ordered or to any tribunal established for the review of his case;

(e)	at the hearing of his case by such tribunal he shall be permitted to appear in person or by a legal representative of his own choice.

(2)	On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of this Article of the case of a restricted or detained person, the tribunal may make recommendations to the authority by which it was ordered concerning the necessity or expediency of continuing his restriction or detention but, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that authority shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any such recommendations.

(3)	Nothing contained in clause (1) (d) or (1) (e) shall be construed as entitling a person to legal representation at the public expense.

(4)	Parliament may make or provide for the making of rules to regulate the proceedings of any such tribunal including, but without derogating from the generality of the foregoing, rules as to evidence and the admissibility thereof, the receipt of evidence (including written reports) in the absence of the restricted or detained person and his legal representative, and the exclusion of the public from the whole or any portion of the proceedings.

(5)	Clauses (10) and (11) of Article 20 shall be read and construed subject to the provisions of this Article.

28.	(1) Whenever—

(а)	a request is made in accordance with clause (2) for a report on a bill or statutory instrument; or

(б)	the Chief Justice considers it necessary for the purpose of determining claims for legal aid in respect of proceedings under Article 29;

the Chief Justice shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of two persons selected by him from amongst persons who hold or have held the office of a judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court.

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(2)	A request for a report on. a bill or a statutory instrument may be made by not less than twenty-one members of the National Assembly by notice in writing delivered—

(а)	in the case of a bill, to the Speaker within three days after the final reading of the bill in the Assembly;

(б)	in the case of a statutory instrument, to the authority having power to make the instrument within fourteen days of the publication of the instrument in the Gazette.

(3)	Where a tribunal is appointed under this Article for the purpose of reporting on a bill or a statutory instrument, the tribunal shall, within the prescribed period, submit a report to the President and to the Speaker of the National Assembly stating—

(a)	in the case of a bill, whether or not in the opinion of the tribunal any, and if so which, provisions of the bill would, if enacted, be inconsistent with this Constitution;

(b)	in the case of a statutory instrument, whether or not in the opinion of the tribunal any, and if so which, provisions of the instrument are inconsistent with this Constitution;

and, if the tribunal reports that any provision would be or is inconsistent with this Constitution, the grounds upon which the tribunal has reached that conclusion:

Provided that if the tribunal considers that the request for a report on a bill or statutory instrument is merely frivolous or vexatious, it may so report to the President without entering further upon the question whether the bill or statutory instrument would be or is inconsistent with this Constitution.

(4)	Where a tribunal is appointed under this Article for the purpose of determining claims for legal aid, the tribunal may grant to any person who satisfies it that—

(a)	he intends to bring or is an applicant in proceedings under Article 29 (1) or 29 (4);

(b)	he has reasonable grounds for bringing the application; and

(c)	he cannot afford to pay for the cost of the application;

a certificate that the application is a proper case to be determined at the public expense:

Provided that paragraph (c) shall not apply in any case where the application relates to the validity of a provision of law in respect of which a tribunal has reported that it would be or is inconsistent with this Constitution or where it appears to the tribunal that issues are or will be raised in the application which are of general public importance.

(5)	Where a certificate is granted to any person by a tribunal in pursuance of clause (4) there shall be paid to that person out of the general revenues of the Republic such amount as the court by which the application is heard may assess as the costs reasonably incurred by that person in connection with the application; and the sums required for making such payment shall be a charge on the general revenues of the Republic.

(6)	For the pui’poses of clause (o)—

(a)	the costs incurred in an application shall include the cost of obtaining the advice of a legal representative and, if necessary, the cost of representation by a legal representative in any court in steps preliminary or incidental to the application;

(b)	in assessing the costs reasonably incurred by a person in an application regard shall be had to costs awarded against that person or recovered by him in those proceedings.

(7)	In this Article “ prescribed period ” means—

(а)	in relation to a bill the period commencing from the appointment of the tribunal to report upon the bill and ending thirty days thereafter or if the Speaker, on the application of the tribunal, considers that owing to the length or complexity of the bill thirty days is insufficient for consideration of the bill, ending on such later day as the Speaker may determine;

(б)	in relation to a statutory instrument the period of forty days commencing from the publication of the instrument in the Gazette.

(8)	Nothing in clause (1), (2) or (3) shall apply to a bill for the appropriation of the general revenues of the Republic or a bill containing only proposals for expressly altering this Constitution or the Act to which this Constitution is scheduled.

29.	(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (6), if any person alleges that any of the provisions of Articles 13 to 27 (inclusive) has been, is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him, then, without prejudice to any other action with respect to the same matter which is lawfully available, that person may apply to the High Court for redress.

(2) The High Court shall have original jurisdiction—

(а)	to hear and determine any application made by any person in pursuance of clause (I);

(б)	to determine any question arising in the case of any person which is referred to it in pursuance of clause (3);

and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of Articles 13 to 27 (inclusive).

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(3)	If in any proceedings in any subordinate court any question arises as to the contravention of any of the provisions of Articles 13 to 27 (inclusive), the person presiding in that court may, and shall if any party to the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the High Court unless, in his opinion, the raising of the question is merely frivolous or vexatious.

(4)	Any person aggrieved by any determination of the High Court under this Article may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court:

Provided that no appeal shall lie from a determination of the High Court under this Article dismissing an application on the ground that it is frivolous or vexatious.

(5)	No application shall be brought under clause (1) on the grounds that the provisions of Articles 13 to 27 (inclusive) are likely to be contravened by reason of proposals contained in any bill which, at the date of the application, has not become a law.

(6)	Parliament may confer upon the Supreme Court or the High Court such jurisdiction or powers in addition to those conferred by this Article as may appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling that court more effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by this Article or of enabling any application for redress to be more speedily determined.

(7)	Rules of court making provision with respect to the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court or the High Court for the purpose of this Article may be made by the persons or authorities for the time being having power to make rules of court with respect to the practice and procedure of those courts generally.

30.	(1) The President may at any time by Proclamation published in the Gazette declare that

(а)	a state of public emergency exists; or

(б)	a situation exists which, if it is allowed to continue, may lead to a state of public emergency.

(2) (a) A declaration made under this Article shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of twenty-eight days commencing with the day on which the declaration is made unless before the expiration of such period it has been approved by a resolution of the National Assembly.

(b)	In reckoning any period of twenty-eight days for the purposes of this clause no account shall be taken of any time during which Parliament is dissolved.

(3) A declaration made under this Article may at any time before it has been approved by a resolution of the National Assembly be revoked by the President by a Proclamation published in the Gazette.

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Interpretation and savings

(4)	A declaration made under this Article and approved by a resolution of the National Assembly in terms of clause (2) may at any time be revoked by a resolution of such Assembly supported by a majority of all the members thereof.

(5)	Whenever an election to the office of President results in a change in the holder of that office any declaration made under this Article and in force immediately before the day on which the President assumes office shall cease to have effect on the expiration of seven days commencing with that day.

(6)	The expiry or revocation of any declaration made under this Article shall not affect the validity of anything previously done under such declaration.

31.	(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires—

“ contravention ”, in relation to any requirement, includes a failure to comply with that requirement and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;

“ court ” means any court of law having jurisdiction in Zambia, other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and in Articles 14 and 16 includes a court established by a disciplinary law;

“ disciplinary law ” means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;

“ disciplined force ” means—

(a)	a naval, military or air force;

(b)	the Zambia Police Force; or

(c)	any other force established by or under an Act

of Parliament;

“ legal representative ” means a person entitled to practise in Zambia as an advocate;

“ member ”, in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.

(2)	In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force raised under the law of Zambia, nothing contained in or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the provisions of this Part other than Articles 14, 16 and 17.

(3)	In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined force raised otherwise than as aforesaid and lawfully present in Zambia, nothing contained in or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the provisions of this Part.

PART IV Leadership Code

32.	There shall be a Leadership Committee, consisting of five members appointed by the President.

33.	(1) The Leadership Committee may by statutory instrument make regulations applicable to the holders of specified offices (which regulations are in this Constitution referred to as the Leadership Code).

(2)	For the purposes of this Part, “ specified office ” means any office specified in the Leadership Code.

34.	(1) Every holder of a specified office shall—

(а)	within three months of the coming into force of the

Leadership Code; or

(б)	if he was elected, nominated or appointed to such

office after the coming into force of the Leadership Code, within three months of his being so elected, nominated or appointed;

comply with the Leadership Code:

Provided that the President may, if he is satisfied that the circumstances of any case so warrant, extend the period for compliance with the Leadership Code.

(2)	The holder of a specified office who fails to comply with the Leadership Code within the period specified in clause (1), or commits a breach thereof, shall vacate such office—

(a)	on the receipt by such authority as may be prescribed of a written admission; or

(b)	on a determination by the tribunal established by Article 35 or, in the event of an appeal, by the Supreme Court;

that the holder of such office has failed to comply with, or has committed a breach of, the Leadership Code:

Provided that the provisions of this clause and of Article 35 shall not apply to the offices of President, judge of the Supreme Court, judge of the High Court, Investigator-General, Director of Public Prosecutions and Auditor-General.

35.	(1) An allegation that a person has not complied with, or has committed a breach of, the Leadership Code shall be heard and determined by a tribunal consisting of a Chairman, to be appointed by the Chief Justice, who is or is qualified to be a judge of the High Court, and two other persons to be appointed by the President.

(2) Any person aggrieved by any determination of such tribunal may appeal therefrom to the Supreme Court.

36.	The Leadership Committee may make rules prescribing the procedure in relation to alleged non-compliance with or breach of the Leadership Code and to regulate the proceedings of such tribunal, and, subject to any such rules, the tribunal shall regulate its own proceedings.

PART V The Executive The President

37.	There shall be a President of the Republic of Zambia who shall be the Head of State.

38.	(1) Whenever Parliament is dissolved an election shall be held to the office of President in such manner as is prescribed by this Article and, subject thereto, by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	A person shall be qualified for election as President if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he—

(a) is a citizen of Zambia;

(ib) is a member of the Party;

(c)	has attained the age of thirty-five years; and

(d)	is otherwise qualified to be elected as a member of the

National Assembly.

(3)	The members of the General Conference shall elect a person to be the President of the Party, and such person shall be the sole candidate in an election to the office of President (hereinafter referred to as “ the Presidential candidate ”).

(4)	The Presidential candidate shall deliver his nomination to the returning officer on such day and at such time as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(5)	The Presidential candidate shall not be entitled to take part in an election to the office of President unless he has paid such election fee as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament on or before the date fixed by the Electoral Commission in that behalf.

(6)	The following provisions shall apply to an election to the office of President:

(a) all persons registered in Zambia as voters for the purposes of election to the National Assembly shall be entitled to vote in the election;

(b)	the poll shall be taken by a secret ballot on such day,

at such time, in such places and in such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament;

(c)	after the expiration of the time fixed for polling, the votes cast shall be counted and the returning officer shall declare the Presidential candidate to be elected as President if such candidate has received a majority of the valid votes cast.

(7)	If the Presidential candidate or the person elected as President before he assumes the office of President dies or the Presidential candidate is not elected as President, the members of the General Conference shall elect another person to be the President of the Party, and such person shall be the next Presidential candidate and the foregoing provisions relating to nomination and election shall apply.

(8)	A person elected to the office of President under this Article shall assume that office on the day upon which he is declared elected.

(9)	In this Article—

“ General Conference ” means the General Conference as defined in the Constitution of the Party;

“ the returning officer ” means the returning officer specified in Article 45.

39.	A person assuming the office of President in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution shall, unless he ceases to hold office by virtue of the provisions of Article 40 or 41 or resigns, continue in office until the person elected at the next election to the office of President following a dissolution of Parliament assumes office.

40.	(1) If the Cabinet resolves, upon a motion supported by the votes of a majority of all the members of the Central Committee of the Party and the Cabinet, that the question of the physical or mental capacity of the President to discharge the functions of his office ought to be investigated and so informs the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice shall appoint a board consisting of not less than three persons selected by him from among persons who are qualified as medical practitioners under the law of Zambia or under the law of any other country in the Commonwealth, and the board shall inquire into the matter and shall make a report to the Chief Justice stating the opinion of the board whether or not the President is, by reason of any infirmity of body or mind, incapable of discharging the functions of his office.

(2)	If the board reports that the President is incapable of discharging the functions of the office of President, the Chief Justice shall certify in writing accordingly and thereupon the President shall cease to hold office.

(3)	Where the Cabinet resolves that the question of the physical or mental capacity of the President to discharge the functions of his office should be investigated the President shall, until another person assumes the office of President or the board appointed in pursuance of clause (1) reports that the President is not incapable of discharging the functions of his office (whichever is the earlier), cease to perform the functions of his office and those functions shall be performed by—

(а)	the Secretary-General of the Party; or

(б)	during any period when there is no Secretary-General

of the Party or the Secretary-General of the Party is absent from Zambia or is unable, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, to discharge the functions of his office, by such member of the Central Committee as the Central Committee shall elect:

Provided that any person performing the functions of the office of President under this clause shall not dissolve parliament nor, save on the advice of the Cabinet, revoke any appointment made by the President.

(4)	A motion for the purposes of clause (1) may be proposed at any meeting of the Cabinet by any member thereof.

(5)	For the purposes of this Article, a certificate of the Chief Justice that the Secretary-General of the Party is, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, unable to discharge the functions of his office shall, in respect of any period for which it is in force, be conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court.

41.	(1) If notice in writing is given to the Speaker of the National Assembly, signed by not less than one-third of all the members of the Assembly, of a motion alleging that the President has committed any violation of the Constitution or any gross misconduct and specifying the particulars of the allegations and proposing that a tribunal be established under this Article to investigate those allegations, the Speaker shall—

(а)	if Parliament is then sitting or has been summoned to meet within five days, cause the motion to be considered by the Assembly within seven days of the notice; or

(б)	if Parliament is not then sitting (and notwithstanding that it may be prorogued) summon the Assembly to meet within twenty-one days of the notice and cause the motion to be considered at that meeting.

(2)	Where a motion under this Article is proposed for consideration by the National Assembly, the Assembly shall not debate the motion but the person presiding in the Assembly shall forthwith cause a vote to be taken on the motion and, if the motion is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the Assembly, shall declare the motion to be passed.

(3)	If the motion is declared to be passed under clause (2)—

(a)	the Chief Justice shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members selected by the Chief Justice from among persons who hold or have held high judicial office;

(£>) the tribunal shall investigate the matter and shall report to the National Assembly whether it finds the particulars of the allegations specified in the motion to have been substantiated;

(c)	the President shall have the right to appear and be represented before the tribunal during its investigation of the allegations against him.

(4)	If the tribunal reports to the National Assembly that the tribunal finds that the particulars of any allegation against the President specified in the motion have not been substantiated no further proceedings shall be taken under this Article in respect of that allegation.

(5)	If the tribunal reports to the National Assembly that the tribunal finds that the particulars of any allegation specified in the motion have been substantiated, the Assembly may, on a motion supported by the votes of not less than three-quarters of all members of the Assembly, resolve that the President has been guilty of such violation of the Constitution or, as the case may be, such gross misconduct as is incompatible with his continuance in office as President and, if the Assembly so resolves, the President shall cease to hold office upon the third day following the passage of the resolution unless he sooner dissolves Parliament.

(6)	No proceedings shall be taken or continued under this Article at any time when Parliament is dissolved.

(7)	For the purposes of this Article “ gross misconduct ” includes a breach of the Leadership Code.

42.	(1) If the office of President becomes vacant by reason of the death or resignation of the President or by reason of the President ceasing to hold office by virtue of Article 40 or 41,

an election to the office of President shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Article 38 within three months from the date of the office becoming vacant.

(2)	Whenever the office of President becomes vacant, the Secretary-General of the Party or, if there is no Secretary-General of the Party or the Secretary-General of the Party is absent from Zambia or is unable, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, to discharge the functions of his office, a member of the Central Committee elected by the Central Committee shall perform the functions of the office of President until a person elected as President in accordance with the provisions of Article 38 assumes office.

(3)	The Secretary-General of the Party or, as the case may be, the member of the Central Committee performing the functions of the office of President under clause (2) shall not dissolve Parliament nor, save on the advice of the Cabinet, revoke any appointment made by the President.

43.	(1) Whenever the President is absent from Zambia or considers it desirable so to do by reason of illness or any other cause he may, by direction in writing, authorise the Secretary-General of the Party, or where there is no Secretary-General of the Party or the Secretary-General of the Party is absent from Zambia or is incapable of discharging the functions of the office of President, any other person, to discharge such of the functions of the office of President as he may specify and the Secretary-General of the Party or, as the case may be, such other person, may discharge those functions until his authority is revoked by the President.

(2)	If the President is incapable by reason of physical or mental infirmity of discharging the functions of his office and the infirmity is of such a nature that the President is unable to authorise another person under this Article to perform those functions—

{a) the Secretary-General of the Party; or

(b)	during any period when there is no Secretary-General of the Party or the Secretary-General of the Party is absent from Zambia or the Secretary-General of the Party is, by reason of physical or mental infirmity, unable to perform the functions of his office, such member of the Central Committee as the Central Committee shall elect;

shall perform the functions of the office of President:

Provided that any person performing the functions of the office of President under this clause shall not dissolve Parliament nor, save on the advice of the Cabinet, revoke any appointment made by the President.

(3)	Any person performing the functions of the office of President by virtue of clause (2) shall cease to perform those functions if he is notified by the President that the President is about to resume those functions.

(4)	For the purposes of this Article, a certificate of the Chief Justice that—

(а)	the President is incapable by reason of physical or

mental infirmity of discharging the functions of his office and the infirmity is of such a nature that the President is unable to authorise another person under this Article to perform the functions of his office; or

(б)	the Secretary-General of the Party is by reason of

physical or mental infirmity unable to discharge the functions of his office; shall, in respect of any period for which it is in force, be conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court:

Provided that any such certificate as is referred to in paragraph (a) shall cease to have effect if the President notifies any person under clause (3) that he is about to resume the functions of the office of President.

44.	A person assuming the office of President shall, before entering upon the office, take and subscribe such oaths as may be prescribed by Parliament.

45.	(1) The Chief Justice shall be the returning officer for the purposes of elections to the office of President.

(2)	Any question which may arise as to whether—

(a)	any provision of this Constitution or any law relating to the election of a President under Article 38 has been complied with; or

(b)	any person has been validly elected as President under that Article;

shall be referred to and determined by the returning officer, whose decision shall not be questioned in any court.

46.	(1) The President shall receive such salary and allowances as may be prescribed by an Act of Parliament, which shall be a charge on the general revenues of the Republic.

(2)	The salary and allowances of the President shall not be altered to his disadvantage during his period of office.

(3)	A person who has held the office of President shall receive such pension or, upon the expiration of his term of office, such gratuity as may be prescribed by an Act of Parliament, which shall be a charge on the general revenues of the Republic.

47.	(1) Whilst any person holds or performs the functions of the office of President no criminal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against him in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by him either in his official capacity or in his private

Prime Minister, Ministers and Junior Ministers

Inability of Prime Minister to discharge functions

capacity and no civil proceedings shall be instituted or continued in respect of which relief is claimed against him in respect of anything done or omitted to be done in his private capacity.

(2) Where provision is made by law limiting the time within which proceedings of any description may be brought against any person, the term of any person in the office of President shall not be taken into account in calculating any period of time prescribed by that law which determines whether any such proceedings as are mentioned in clause (1) may be brought against that person.

The Prime Minister and the Cabinet

48.	(1) There shall be an office of Prime Minister and such offices of Minister of the Government and such offices of Junior Minister as may be established by Parliament or, subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament, by the President.

(2)	Appointment to the office of Prime Minister shall be made by the President from among the members of the National Assembly.

(3)	Appointments to the office of Minister or Junior Minister shall be made by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister from among the members of the National Assembly.

(4)	Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2) or (3), if the occasion arises for making an appointment to the office of Prime Minister, Minister or Junior Minister while Parliament is dissolved a person who was a member of the Assembly before the dissolution may be appointed—

(a)	Prime Minister by the President;

(6) Minister or Junior Minister by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister.

(5)	The office of Prime Minister, Minister or Junior Minister shall become vacant—

{a) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament;

(b)	if the holder of the office is removed from office, in the

case of the Prime Minister by the President, and in the case of a Minister or a Junior Minister by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister; or

(c)	upon the assumption by any person of the office of President.

49.	If the Prime Minister is absent from Zambia or is incapable by reason of illness or any other cause of discharging the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person, from among the Ministers, to perform the functions of the office

of Prime Minister and any person so appointed may discharge those functions accordingly:

Provided that the Minister appointed under this Article shall cease to perform the functions of the office of Prime Minister—

(i)	if his appointment is revoked by the President;

(ii)	if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parliament;

(iii)	upon the return to Zambia of the Prime Minister or the resumption by him of the functions of his office, as the case may be; or

(iv)	upon the assumption by any person of the office of President.

50.	(1) There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the Secretary-General of the Party ex officio, the Prime Minister and the Ministers.

(2)	There shall preside at meetings of the Cabinet—

(a)	the President;

(b)	in the absence of the President, the Secretary-General of the Party;

(c)	in the absence of the President and the Secretary-

General of the Party, the Prime Minister; or

(d)	in the absence of the President, the Secretary-General of the Party and the Prime Minister, such Minister as the President may designate.

(3)	The Cabinet may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership.

51.	(1) The Secretary-General of the Party shall not enter upon the duties of his office as a member ex officio of the Cabinet unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament.

(2) A Prime Minister, Minister or Junior Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament.

52.	(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet whose office shall be a public office and who shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister.

(2) The office of the Secretary to the Cabinet shall become vacant—

(a)	if the holder of the office is removed from office by the President; or

(b)	in the circumstances set out in Article 34 (2).

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Functions

of

President

Command of

armed

forces

(3)	The Secretary to the Cabinet shall—

(a)	be responsible to the Prime Minister for securing the general efficiency of the public service;

(£>) have charge of the Cabinet office and shall be responsible, in accordance with such instructions as may be given to him by the Prime Minister, for arranging the business for, and keeping the minutes of, the Cabinet and for conveying decisions of the Cabinet to the appropriate person or authority; and

(c)	have such other functions as may be prescribed by Act of Parliament or as the Prime Minister may from time to time direct.

Executive Functions

53.	(1) The executive power of the Republic shall vest in the President and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him.

(2)	In the exercise of any function conferred upon him by this Constitution or any other law the President shall, unless it is otherwise provided, act in his own deliberate judgment and shall not be obliged to follow the advice tendered by any other person or authority.

(3)	Nothing in this Article shall prevent Parliament from conferring functions on persons or authorities other than the President.

54.	(1) The supreme command of the armed forces of the Republic shall vest in the President and he shall hold the office of Commander-in-Chief.

(2)	The powers conferred on the President by clause (1) shall include—

(а)	the power to determine the operational use of the armed forces;

(б)	the power to appoint members of the armed forces, to make appointments on promotion to any office in the armed forces and to dismiss any member of the armed forces.

(3)	The President may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as he may think fit, delegate to any member of the armed forces any of the powers mentioned in clause (2).

(4)	Parliament may regulate the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Article.

55.	The Prime Minister shall be the head of Government administration, the leader of Government business in the National Assembly and responsible, under the directions of the President, for such other business of the Government as the President may assign to him.

56.	(1) The Cabinet shall be responsible for advising the President with respect to the policy of the Government and with respect to such other matters as may be referred to it by the President.

(2)	A Minister shall be responsible, under the direction of the President, for such business of the Government (including the administration of any department of Government) as the President in consultation with the Prime Minister may assign to him.

(3)	A Junior Minister shall assist the President, the Prime Minister or a Minister, as the case may be, in the discharge of such of the functions of the office of President, Prime Minister or Minister as the President in consultation with the Prime Minister may specify.

57.	(1) There shall be an Attorney-General of the Republic who shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister and shall be the principal legal adviser to the Government.

(2)	A person shall not be qualified to be appointed to the office of Attorney-General unless he is qualified to be appointed to the office of a judge of the High Court.

(3)	The office of the Attorney-General shall become vacant—

(а)	if the holder of the office is removed from office by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister;

(б)	if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of the Party;

(c)	in the circumstances set out in Article 34 (2); or

(d)	upon the assumption by any person of the office of President.

(4)	In the exercise of the power to give directions to the Director of Public Prosecutions conferred by Article 58 (6) the Attorney-General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

58.	(1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions of the Republic, whose office shall be a public office.

(2) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall have power in any case in which he considers it desirable so to do—

Functions of

Prime

Minister

Functions of Cabinet, Ministers and Junior Ministers

Attorney-

Genera)

Direotor of

Publio

Prosecutions

(a)	to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against any person before any court (other than a court-martial) in respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by that person;

(b)	to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings as have been instituted or undertaken by any other person or authority; and

(c)	to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered any such criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by himself or any other person or authority.

(3)	The powers of the Director of Public Prosecutions under clause (2) may be exercised by him in person or by such public officers or class of public officers as may be specified by him acting in accordance with his general or special instructions:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall preclude the representation of the Director of Public Prosecutions before any court by a legal practitioner.

(4)	The powers conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by clauses (2) (b) and (c) shall be vested in him to the exclusion of any other person or authority:

Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this clause shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.

(5)	For the purposes of this Article, any appeal from any judgment in any criminal proceedings before any court, or any case stated or question of law reserved for the purpose of any such proceedings, to any other court in Zambia shall be deemed to be part of those proceedings:

Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by clause (2) (c) shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.

(6)	In the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this Article, the Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority:

Provided that where the exercise of any such power in any case may, in the judgment of the Director, involve general considerations of public policy the Director shall bring the case to the notice of the Attorney-General and shall, in the exercise of his powers in relation to that case, act in accordance with any directions of the Attorney-General.

59.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, a person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions shall vacate his office when he attains the age of sixty years.

(2)	A person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(3)	If the President considers that the question of removing a person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions from office ought to be investigated then—

(a)	he shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members, who hold or have held high judicial office;

(b)	the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the President and advise the President whether the person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions ought to be removed from office under this Article for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.

(4)	Where a tribunal appointed under clause (3) advises the President that a person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour, the President shall remove such person from office.

(5)	If the question of removing a person holding the office of Director of Public Prosecutions from office has been referred to a tribunal under this Article, the President may suspend that person from performing the functions of his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President that the person ought not to be removed from office.

(6)	For the purposes of this Article “ misbehaviour ” includes a breach of the Leadership Code.

60.	The President may—

(а)	grant to any person convicted of any offence a pardon, either free or subject to lawful conditions;

(б)	grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified period, of the execution of any punishment imposed on that person for any offence;

(c)	substitute a less severe form of punishment for any punishment imposed on any person for any offence; and

(d)	remit the whole or part of any punishment imposed on any person for any offence or of any penalty or forfeiture or confiscation otherwise due to the Government on account of any offence.

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Advisory

oommittee

Constitution of offices

Legislative

power

Composition of National Assembly

61.	(1) There shall be an advisory committee on the prerogative of mercy which shall consist of such persons as may be appointed by the President.

(2)	The President may appoint different persons to the advisory committee for the purposes of advising him in relation to persons convicted by courts-martial and for the purposes of advising him in relation to persons convicted by other courts.

(3)	A member of the advisory committee shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.

(4)	Where any person has been sentenced to death for any offence the President shall cause the question of the exercise in relation to that person of the powers conferred by Article 60 to be considered at a meeting of the advisory committee.

(6) Subject to the provisions of clause (4), the President may refer to the advisory committee any question as to the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by Article 60.

(6)	The President, if present, shall preside at any meeting of the advison' committee.

(7)	The President may determine the procedure of the advisory committee.

62.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any Act of Parliament, the powers of constituting and abolishing offices for the Republic shall vest in the President.

(2)	The President may by statutory instrument declare that an office constituted by him shall not be an office in the public service.

(3)	Appointments to an office declared by the President not to be an office in the public service shall be made by the President.

PART VI Parliament Composition

63.	The legislative power of the Republic shall vest in the Parliament of Zambia which shall consist of the President and a National Assembly.

64.	The National Assembly shall consist of—

(a)	one hundred and twenty-five elected members; and

(b)	such nominated members as may be appointed under

Article 66; and

(c)	the Speaker of the National Assembly.

65.	Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the elected members of the National Assembly shall be elected in such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

66.	The President may appoint as nominated members of the National Assembly such persons, not exceeding ten in number, as he considers desirable in the public interest in order to enhance the representative character of the Assembly or to obtain the service as a member of the Assembly of any person who, by reason of his special qualifications, would be of special value as such a member.

67.	Subject to the provisions of Article 68, a person shall be qualified to be elected or nominated as a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be qualified to be so elected •or nominated unless—

(а)	he is a citizen of Zambia;

(б)	he has attained the age of twenty-one years;

(c)	he is a member of the Party; and

(d)	he is literate and conversant with the official language of Zambia:

Provided that—

(i)	a person shall not be qualified to be a candidate for election to the National Assembly unless he is one of the successful candidates at the primary elections held in accordance with the provisions of Article 75 and his candidature has not been disapproved by the Central Committee;

(ii)	a person who has been unsuccessful at a primary election held in accordance with the provisions of Article 75, or whose candidature for election to the National Assembly has been disapproved by the Central Committee, or who has been defeated at an election to the National Assembly, shall not be qualified to be nominated as a member of the Assembly during the life of the Parliament for which such election was held.

68.	(1) No person shall be qualified to be elected or nominated as a member of the National Assembly—

(a)	who is under a declaration of allegiance to some

country other than Zambia;

(b)	who is, under any law in force in Zambia, adjudged or otherwise declared to be of unsound mind;

{c) who has been convicted of any offence prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, unless a period of

Disqualifications for election or nomination to National Assembly

Speaker

five years has elapsed after his conviction or, if he has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment, after he has served the sentence;

(d)	who is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Zambia;

(e)	whose freedom of movement is restricted, or who is detained, under the authority of any such law as is referred to in Article 24 or 26, as the case may be.

(2)	No person who holds, or is a validly nominated candidate in an election for, the office of President shall be qualified for election as a member of the National Assembly.

(3)	Parliament may provide that a person who holds or is acting in any office that is specified by Parliament and the functions of which involve responsibility for, or in connection with, the conduct of any election to the National Assembly or the compilation of any register of voters for the purposes of such an election shall not be qualified to be elected or nominated as a member of the Assembly.

(4)	Parliament may provide that a person who is convicted by any court of any offence that is prescribed by Parliament and that is connected with elections of the members of the National Assembly or who is reported guilty of such an offence by the court trying an election petition shall not be qualified to be nominated or elected as a member of the Assembly for such period (not exceeding five years) following his conviction or, as the case may be, following the report of the court as may be so prescribed.

(6) A person holding or acting in any post, office or appointment in the civil service of the Government, or any police force, or any post, office or appointment prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, shall vacate such post, office or appointment immediately upon his being declared elected as a member of the National Assembly.

(6) A person holding or acting in any post, office or appointment in any of the armed forces of Zambia shall not be qualified to be elected as a member of the National Assembly unless he has resigned from such post, office or appointment.

69.	(1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected by the members of the Assembly from among persons who are qualified to be elected as members of the Assembly but are not members of the Assembly.

(2)	The Speaker shall vacate his office—

(a)	if any circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would disqualify him for election as such;

(b)	when the Assembly first sits after any dissolution of Parliament;

(c)	if the Assembly resolves, upon a motion supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof, that he should be removed from office; or

(d)	in the circumstances set out in Article 34 (2).

(3)	No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly (other than an election to the office of Speaker) at any time when the office of Speaker is vacant.

70.	(1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly who shall be elected by the members of the Assembly from among the persons who are members of the Assembly other than the Prime Minister, Ministers, Junior Ministers, or persons holding or acting in any office that is prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	The members of the National Assembly shall elect a person to the office of Deputy Speaker when the Assembly first sits after any dissolution of Parliament and, if the office becomes vacant otherwise than by reason of the dissolution of Parliament, at the first sitting of the Assembly after the office becomes vacant.

(3)	The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office—

(а)	if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly;

(б)	if he assumes the office of President or becomes the Prime Minister, a Minister, a Junior Minister or a person holding or acting in any office prescribed under clause (1); or

(c)	if the Assembly resolves that he should be removed from office.

71.	(1) Every member of the National Assembly (with the exception of the Speaker) shall vacate his seat in the Assembly upon a dissolution of Parliament.

(2)	A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat in the Assembly—

(a)	if he ceases to be a citizen of Zambia;

(b)	if he ceases to be a member of the Party;

(c)	in the circumstances set out in Article 34 (2);

(d)	if he assumes the office of President;

(e)	if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified for election as such under Article 68

(1)	(a), (b), (c) or (d) or under any law made in pursuance of Article 68 (3) or (4);

(/) if he accepts any such post, office or appointment as is referred to in Article 68 (5) or (6) ;

Deputy

Speaker

(g)	if under the authority of any such law as is referred to in Article 24 or 26—

(i)	his freedom of movement has been restricted or he has been detained for a continuous period exceeding six months; or

(ii)	his freedom of movement has been restricted and he has immediately thereafter been detained and the total period of restriction and detention together exceeds six months; or

(iii)	he has been detained and immediately thereafter his freedom of movement has been restricted and the total period of detention and restriction together exceeds six months;

(h)	in the case of a nominated member if his appointment is revoked by the President.

(3)	Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2) (e), where any member of the National Assembly who has been convicted of any offence specified by or under an Act of Parliament under Article 68 (1) (c), adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, adjudged or declared bankrupt or convicted or reported guilty of any offence prescribed under Article 68 (4) appeals against the decision or applies for a free pardon in accordance with any law, the decision shall not have effect for the purposes of this Article until the final determination of such appeal or application:

Provided that—

(i)	such member shall not, pending such final determination, exercise Iris functions or receive any remuneration as a member of the National Assembly;

(ii) if on the final determination of the member’s appeal or application his conviction is set aside, or he is granted a free pardon, or he is declared not to be of unsound mind or bankrupt or guilty of an offence prescribed under Article 68 (4), then and in any such event the member shall be entitled to resume his functions as a member of the National Assembly (unless he has previously resigned or his nomination has been revoked), and to receive remuneration as such member for the period during which he did not exercise his functions by reason of the provisions of paragraph (i) of this proviso.

72.	(1) Every citizen of Zambia who has attained the age of eighteen years shall, unless he is disqualified by Parliament from registration as a voter for the purposes of elections to the National Assembly, be entitled to be registered as such a voter under a law in that behalf, and no other person may be so registered.

(2)	Every person who is registered in any constituency as a voter for the purposes of elections to the National Assembly shall, unless he is disqualified by Parliament from voting in

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

■such elections on the grounds of liis having been convicted of an offence in connection with elections or on the grounds of his having been reported guilty of such an offence by the '•curt trying an election petition or on the grounds of his being in lawful custody at the date of the election, be entitled so to vote in that constituency in accordance -with the provisions made by or under an Act of Parliament in that behalf; and no other person may so vote.

73.	(1) The President shall establish an Electoral Commission for the purposes of reviewing the boundaries of the constituencies into which Zambia is divided by Article 74—

(a)	at such times (being not less than eight or more than ten years since the boundaries of those constituencies were last reviewed) as the President may from time to time appoint;

(b)	whenever Parliament has made provision altering the number of seats in the National Assembly (other than the seats of the nominated members);

(c)	whenever a census of the population has been held in pursuance of any law.

(2)	The President shall establish an Electoral Commission for the purposes of supervising the registration of voters and the conduct of elections whenever Parliament is dissolved or he otherwise considers it to be necessary.

(3)	An Electoral Commission shall consist of a Chairman and two other members who shall be appointed by the President.

(4)	A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairman of an Electoral Commission unless he holds or has held high judicial office.

(5)	A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of an Electoral Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly.

(6)	If, after the appointment of an Electoral Commission and before the Commission stands dissolved, the office of Chairman or any member of the Commission falls vacant or the holder of the office becomes unable for any reason to discharge his functions as a member of the Commission, the President may appoint another person qualified for appointment to be the Chairman or, as the case may be, a member of the Commission.

(7)	An Electoral Commission established under clause (1) shall be called a Delimitation Commission and shall stand dissolved upon such date as the President may determine, and an Electoral Commission established under clause (2) shall stand dissolved on such date (not being earlier, in the case of a

Electoral

Commission

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Constituencies and elections

Commission established upon a dissolution of Parliament, than the date upon which Parliament first sits after that dissolution) as the President may determine.

(8)	In the exercise of its functions under this Constitution an Electoral Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

74.	(1) Zambia shall be divided into constituencies for the purposes of elections to the National Assembly so that—

(a)	the number of such constituencies shall be equal to the

number of seats of elected members in the Assembly;

and

(b)	the boundaries of such constituencies shall be such as a

Delimitation Commission may prescribe.

(2)	In delimiting the constituencies the Delimitation Commission shall have regard to the availability of means of communication and the geographical features of the area to be divided into constituencies:

Provided that the constituencies shall be so delimited that there shall be at least ten constituencies in each administrative Province.

(3)	Each constituency shall return one member to the National Assembly.

(4)	The boundaries of each constituency shall be such that the number of inhabitants thereof is as nearly equal to the population quota as is reasonably practicable:

Provided that the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of means of communication, geographical features and the difference between urban and rural areas in respect of density of population, and of the proviso to clause (2).

(5)	Where a Delimitation Commission is established under Article 73 it shall review the boundaries and may in accordance with the provisions of this Article alter the constituencies to such extent as it considers desirable:

Provided that a Commission established by reason of the holding of a census of the population may, if the Commission considers that the changes in the distribution of population reported in the census do not justify an alteration in the boundaries, so report to the President without entering upon a review of the boundaries of the constituencies.

(6)	Any alteration of the constituencies shall come into effect upon the next dissolution of Parliament.

(7)	In this Article “ the population quota ” means the number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants of Zambia by the number of constituencies into which Zambia is to be divided under this Article.

(8)	For the purposes of this Article the number of inhabitants of Zambia shall be ascertained by reference to the latest census of the population held in pursuance of any law.

(9)	During any period when an Electoral Commission is established under Article 73 (2) the registration of voters and the conduct of elections in every constituency shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the Commission.

75.	(1) For the purpose of selecting persons from any con-stituency to be candidates for election to the National Assembly, the Electoral Commission shall hold primary elections in that constituency in such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	Any person who is qualified to be elected as a member of the Assembly under Article 67 and is not disqualified under Article 68 may deliver his nomination to the returning officer appointed by the Electoral Commission on such day and at such time and at such place as may be determined by the Commission:

Provided that the nomination shall not be valid unless it is supported by not less than nine persons registered as voters in that constituency for the purpose of election to the National Assembly.

(3)	At a primary election a poll shall be held at which the following persons resident within the constituency of the National Assembly shall be entitled to vote:

(a)	the Regional Secretaries, the Regional Women Secre-

taries, Regional Youth and Publicity Secretaries and two Trustees of the Party;

(b)	the Chairmen, the Vice-Chairmen, the Secretaries, the Vice-Secretaries, the Treasurers, the Vice-Treasurers, the Publicity Secretaries and the Vice-Publicity Secretaries of every constituency of the Party; and

(c)	the Chairmen, the Vice-Chairmen, the Secretaries, the

Vice-Secretaries, the Treasurers, the Vice-Treasurers, the Publicity Secretaries and the Vice-Publicity Secretaries of every Branch of the Party.

(4)	At the conclusion of the poll the Electoral Commission shall declare the number of votes received by each candidate and shall thereafter submit the names of all the candidates to the Central Committee together with the number of votes received by each candidate.

(5)	In any constituency of the National Assembly the three persons who have received the greatest number of votes at the primary election shall be qualified for nomination as candidates for election to the National Assembly from that constituency, unless the Central Committee disapproves the nomination of any such person on the ground that his nomination would be inimical to the interests of the State, in which event the person

who has received the next highest number of votes after the said three persons at the primary elections shall become qualified for the nomination.

76.	(1) Nominations for election to the National Assembly shall be delivered to the returning officer on such day and at such time and at such place as may be prescribed by the Electoral Commission.

(2)	Any such nomination shall not be valid unless the candidate has paid the election fee prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

77.	(1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether—

(a)	any person has been validly elected or appointed as a member of the National Assembly or the seat of any such member has become vacant;

(b)	any person has been validly elected as Speaker or

Deputy Speaker of the Assembly or, having been so-elected, has vacated the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker.

(2)	Parliament may make provision with respect to—

(а)	the persons who may apply to the High Court for the

determination of any question under this Article;

(б)	the circumstances and manner in which and the con-

ditions upon which any such application may be made and

(c)	the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court-

in relation to any such application.

(3)	The determination by the High Court of any question under this Article shall not be subject to appeal:

Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court, with the leave of that Court, from any such determination by the-High Court in so far as it involves any question as to the interpretation of this Constitution.

78.	(1) There shall be a Clerk of the National Assembly and such other offices in the department of the Clerk of the Assembly as may be prescribed by resolution of the National Assembly.

(2)	Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the office of Clerk of the National Assembly shall vest in the Speaker of the Assembly:

Provided that no person shall be appointed to hold the-office of Clerk of the Assembly unless a proposal for the appointment of that person has been submitted to the Assembly and the Assembly has resolved that he should be appointed.

(3)	Subject to the provisions of clause (4), the Clerk of the National Assembly shall vacate his office—

(a)	in the circumstances set out in Article 34 (2); or

(b)	when he attains the age of fifty-five years.

(4)	The Clerk of the National Assembly may be removed from office by resolution of the Assembly for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour but shall not be otherwise removed.

(5)	Power to appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the department of the Clerk of the National Assembly (other than the office of Clerk) and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the Speaker of the Assembly.

(6)	(a) Before exercising the powers conferred by clause (5) to appoint any person to hold or to act in any office to which this clause applies or to remove from office any person holding such an office, the Speaker of the National Assembly shall consult the Public Service Commission, and if the Speaker acts otherwise than in accordance with the recommendation of the Commission he shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, inform the Assembly that he has so acted.

(b) This clause applies tp any office in the department of the Clerk of the National Assembly, other than any office in respect of which the annual emoluments do not exceed such sum as may be prescribed by resolution of the Assembly.

Legislation and Procedure in National Assembly

79.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the legislative power of Parliament shall be exercised by bills passed by the National Assembly and assented to by the President.

(2)	No bill (other than such a bill as is mentioned in Article 28 (8)) shall be presented to the President until after the expiration of three days from the third reading of the bill by the National Assembly, and where a bill is referred to a tribunal in accordance with Article 28 that bill shall not be presented to the President for assent until the tribunal has reported on the bill or the time for making a report has expired, whichever is the earlier.

(3)	Where a bill is presented to the President for assent he shall either assent or withhold his assent.

(4)	Where the President withholds his assent to a bill, the bill shall be returned to the National Assembly:

Provided that if the President withholds his assent to a bill in respect of which a tribunal has reported under Article 28 that it would, if enacted, be inconsistent with Part III, the bill shall be returned to the Assembly only if the President so directs.

(5)	Where the President withholds his assent to a bill, the bill shall not again be presented for assent:

Provided that if, in the case of a bill returned to the Assembly, the Assembly resolves within six months of the bill being so returned upon a motion supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the Assembly that the bill should again be presented for assent, the bill shall be so presented.

(6)	Where a bill is again presented to the President for assent in accordance with the provisions of clause (5) the President shall assent to the bill within twenty-one days of its presentation, unless he sooner dissolves Parliament.

(7)	When a bill that has been duly passed is assented to in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution it shall become law and the President shall thereupon cause it to be published in the Gazette as a law.

(8)	No law made by Parliament shall come into operation until it has been published in the Gazette, but Parliament may postpone the coming into operation of any such law and may make laws with retrospective effect.

(9)	All laws made by Parliament shall be styled “Acts” and the words of enactment shall be “Enacted by the Parliament of Zambia ”

80.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, Parliament may alter this Constitution or the Constitution of Zambia Act, 1973.

(2)	A bill for an Act of Parliament under this Article shall not be passed unless—

(a)	not less than thirty days before the first reading of the

bill in the National Assembly the text of the bill is published in the Gazette; and

(b)	the bill is supported on second and third readings by

the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the Assembly.

(3)	In this Article—

(a)	references to this Constitution or the Constitution of Zambia Act, 1973, include references to any law that

amends or replaces any of the provisions of this Constitution or that Act; and

(6) references to the alteration of this Constitution, the Constitution of Zambia Act, 1973, or of any Part or Article include references to the amendment, modification or re-enactment, with or without amendment or modification, of any provision for the time being contained in this Constitution, that Act, Part or Article, the suspension or repeal of any such provision and the making of different provision in lieu of such provision, and the addition of new provisions to this Constitution, that Act, Part or Article.

(4)	Nothing in this Article shall be so construed as to require the publication of any amendment to any such bill as is referred to in clause (2) proposed to be moved in the National Assembly.

81.	(1) Nothing in Article 63 shall prevent Parliament from conferring on any person or authority power to make statutory instruments.

(2)	Every statutory instrument shall be published in the Gazette not later than fourteen days after it is made or, in the case of a statutory instrument which will not have the force of law unless it is approved by some person or authority other than the person or authority by which it was made, not later than fourteen days after it is so approved, and if it is not so published it shall be void from the date on which it was made.

(3)	Where a tribunal appointed under Article 28 reports to the President that any provision of a statutory instrument is inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution, the President may, by order, annul that statutory instrument and it shall thereupon be void from the date on which it was made.

82.	Except upon the recommendation of the President signified by the Prime Minister or a Minister, the National Assembly shall not—

(a)	proceed upon any bill (including any amendment to a bill) that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for any of the following purposes:

(i)	for the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction;

(ii)	for the imposition of any charge upon the general revenues of the Republic or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;

(iii)	for the payment, issue or withdrawal from the general revenues of the Republic of any moneys not charged thereon or any increase in the amount of such payment, issue or withdrawal; or

(iv)	for the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government; or

(6) proceed upon any motion (including any amendment to a motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the person presiding, would be to make provision for any of those purposes.

83.	(1) The President may, at any time, attend and address the National Assembly.

(2)	The President may send messages to the National Assembly and any such message shall be read, at the first convenient sitting of the Assembly after it is received, by the Prime Minister or by a Minister designated by the President.

84.	The Speaker of the National Assembly, before assuming the duties of his office, and every member of the Assembly, before taking Iris seat therein, shall take and subscribe before the Assembly the oath of allegiance.

85.	There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly—

(a)	the Speaker of the Assembly;

(b)	in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or

(c)	in the absence of the Speaker and of the Deputy

Speaker, such member of the Assembly (not being the Prime Minister, a Minister, a Junior Minister or the holder of any other office prescribed by Parliament for the purposes of this Article) as the Assembly may elect for that purpose.

86.	If objection is taken by any member of the National Assembly present that there are present in the Assembly (besides the person presiding) less than one-third of all the members of the Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that the number of persons present is still less than one-third of all the members of the Assembly, he shall thereupon adjourn the Assembly.

87.	Members of the National Assembly shall be free to speak and vote on any issue in the Assembly.

88.	(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any question proposed for decision in the National Assembly shall be determined by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting.

(2)	The Speaker shall not have an original vote but if upon any question before the National Assembly the votes are equally divided he shall have and exercise a casting vote.

(3)	Any member of the National Assembly, other than the Speaker, shall, when presiding in the Assembly, retain his original vote as a member and shall also have and exercise a casting vote where the votes are equally divided.

(4)	The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may make provision under which a member who votes upon a quostion in which he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted.

89.	Any person who sits or votes in the National Assembly knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not entitled to do so shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one hundred kwacha or such other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament for each day on which he so sits or votes in the Assembly, which shall be recoverable by action in the High Court at the suit of the Attorney-General.

90.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may determine its own procedure.

(2)	The National Assembly may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership (including any vacancy not filled when the Assembly first meets after any dissolution of Parliament) and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly shall not invalidate those proceedings.

91.	The National Assembly and its members shall have such privileges and immunities as may be prescribed by an Act of Parliament.

Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliament

92.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, each session of Parliament shall be held at such place ■within Zambia and shall commence at such time as the President may appoint.

(2)	There shall be a session of Parliament at least once in every year so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of the National Assembly in one session and the first sitting thereof in the next session.

(3)	Whenever Parliament is dissolved a general election of members of the National Assembly shall be held and the first session of the new Parliament shall commence within three months from the date of that dissolution.

93.	(1) The President may at any time prorogue Parliament.

(2)	Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the President may at any time dissolve Parliament.

(3)	Subject to the provisions of clause (4), Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years from the date of its first sitting after any dissolution and shall then stand dissolved.

(4)	At any time when the Republic is at war. Parliament may from time to time extend the period of five years specified in clause (3) for not more than twelve months at a time:

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Sittings of

National

Assembly

Composition of House of Chiefs

Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this clause for more than five years.

(5)	If, after a dissolution of Parliament and before the holding of the general election of members of the National Assembly, the President considers that, owing to the existence of a state of war or of a state of emergency in Zambia or any part thereof, it is necessary to recall Parliament, the President may summon the Parliament that has been dissolved to meet and that Parliament shall be deemed to be the Parliament for the time being, but the general election of members of the National Assembly shall proceed and the Parliament that has been recalled shall, if not sooner dissolved, again stand dissolved on the day appointed for the nomination of candidates in that general election.

94.	(1) The President may at any time summon a meeting of the National Assembly.

(2)	Subject to the provisions of clause (1) and of Article 41 (1), the sittings of the National Assembly in any session of Parliament after the commencement of that session shall be held at such times and on such days as the Assembly shall appoint.

PART VII The House op Chiefs

95.	(1) There shall be a House of Chiefs for the Republic.

(2)	The members of the House of Chiefs shall be—

(а)	four Chiefs representing each of the following Provinces, that is to say, the Northern Province, the Western Province, the Southern Province and the Eastern Province;

(б)	three Chiefs representing each of the following

Provinces, that is to say, the North-Western Province, the Luapula Province and the Central Province; and

(c)	two Chiefs representing the Copperbelt Province.

(3)	No Chief shall be qualified to be a member of the House if he is a member of the National Assembly.

(4)	A person elected or appointed Chairman of the House of Chiefs in accordance with Article 98 who is not a member of the House shall be deemed to be a member.

(5)	A member of the House of Chiefs shall vacate his seat in the House—

(а)	at the expiration of three years from the date of his election or appointment;

(б)	if he ceases to be a Chief; or

(c)	if any other circumstances arise that would cause him to be disqualified for election or appointment thereto.

96.	The House of Chiefs may consider and discuss—

(a)	any bill introduced into or proposed to be introduced

into the National Assembly that is referred to the House by the President; or

(b)	any other matter referred to the House for its con-

sideration by the President or approved by the President for consideration by the House; and may submit resolutions on any such bill or other matter to the President, which the President shall cause to be laid before the National Assembly.

97.	The Chiefs representing Provinces in the House of Chiefs shall be elected in the manner prescribed by the Schedule to this Constitution.

98.	(1) There shall be a Chairman of the House of Chiefs who shall be elected by the members of that House:

Provided that, if the members of the House of Chiefs so resolve in respect of any vacancy in the office of Chairman of the House, upon a motion supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House, the President may appoint a person to fill that vacancy.

(2)	The Chairman of the House of Chiefs may be elected or appointed from amongst the members of the House of Chiefs or from outside the House, but the President, the Secretary -General of the Party, the Prime Minister, a Minister or a Junior Minister shall not be qualified to be elected or appointed as Chairman of the House of Chiefs.

(3)	The Chairman of the House of Chiefs shall vacate his office—

(а)	if having been elected or appointed from among the

members of the House, he ceases to be a member of the House;

(б)	if any circumstances arise that would disqualify him for election or appointment as such; or

(c)	at the commencement of the first meeting of the House

after the expiration of twelve months from the date of his election or appointment.

99.	(1) There shall be a Vice-Chairman of the House of Chiefs who shall be elected by the members of the House from amongst such members.

(2)	The Vice-Chairman of the House of Chiefs shall vacate his office—

(а)	if he ceases to be a member of the House; or

(б)	if his appointment is revoked by the President.

100.	The Chairman of the House of Chiefs, before assuming the duties of his office, and every member of the House, before taking his seat therein, shall take and subscribe before the House the oath of allegiance.

101.	(1) There shall preside at any meeting of the House of Chiefs—

(a)	the Chairman of the House;

(b)	in the absence of the Chairman of the House, the Vice-Chairman; or

(c)	in the absence of the Chairman of the House and the Vice-Chairman, such member of the House as the House may elect for that sitting.

(2)	References in this Article to circumstances in which the Chairman of the House of Chiefs or Vice-Chairman is absent include references to circumstances in which the office of Chairman of the House or Vice-Chairman is vacant.

102.	If objection is taken by any member of the House of Chiefs present that there are present in the House (besides the person presiding) less than seven members of the House and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the House, the person presiding ascertains that the number of members present is still less than seven, he shall thereupon adjourn the House.

103.	The House of Chiefs shall meet at such times and at such places as the President may appoint.

104.	(1) The President, the Secretary-General of the Party or the Prime Minister may, at any time, attend and address the House of Chiefs.

(2)	A Minister or a person appointed in that behalf by a Minister may attend the proceedings of the House of Chiefs when any matter for which the Minister is responsible is under consideration by the House.

(3)	The Chairman of the House of Chiefs, when in his opinion any matter before the House of Chiefs makes it desirable, may invite any member of the National Assembly to attend the proceedings of the House relating to that matter.

(4)	A person attending the proceedings of the House of Chiefs by virtue of the provisions of clause (2) or (3) shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings of the House relating to the matter for which the Minister has responsibility or in respect of which he was invited to attend, as the case may be, as if he were a member of the House:

Provided that he shall not be entitled to vote in the House or any of its committees.

105.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the House of Chiefs may determine its own procedure.

(2)	The House of Chiefs may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership and the presence or participation of any person not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceedings of the House shall not invalidate those proceedings.

106.	Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the President may by regulations provide for all or any of the following matters:

(a)	the appointment and tenure of office of a clerk and other officers of the House of Chiefs;

(b)	the remuneration of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman and other members of the House;

(c)	the regulation and orderly conduct of the proceedings of the House;

(d)	the definition and trial of offences relating to the election of members of the House and the imposition of penalties therefor;

(e)	the application to the House and the members of the House of any of the provisions of any law for the time being in force relating to the privileges and immunities of the National Assembly and the members thereof;

(/) the selection of Chiefs to be members of the House of Chiefs.

PART VIII The Judicature The Supreme Court and High Court

107.	(1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Zambia which shall be the final court of appeal for the Republic.

(2)	The judges of the Supreme Court shall be—

(a)	the Chief Justice;

(b)	the Deputy Chief Justice;

(c)	two Supreme Court Judges or such greater numoer as

may be prescribed by Parliament.

(3)	The office of the Deputy Chief Justice or of a Supreme Court Judge shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof.

(4)	The Supreme Court shall be a superior court of record, and, save as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court.

(5)	When the Supreme Court is determining any matter, other than an interlocutory matter, it shall be composed of an uneven number of judges, not being less than three.

108.	(1) The Chief Justice and the other judges of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President.

(2) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant or if the Chief Justice is on leave or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office, or until the

person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, the President may appoint the Deputy Chief Justice or a Supreme Court Judge to perform such functions.

(3)	If the office of the Deputy Chief Justice or of a Supreme Court Judge is vacant, or if the Deputy Chief Justice is appointed to act as Chief Justice, or if any Supreme Court Judge is appointed to act as Chief Justice or Deputy Chief Justice, or if the Deputy Chief Justice or any Supreme Court Judge is on leave or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person qualified for appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court to act as the Deputy Chief Justice or a Supreme Court Judge as the case may be:

Provided that a person may act as a Deputy Chief Justice or a Supreme Court Judge notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed by Article 113.

(4)	A puisne judge appointed to act as the Deputy Chief Justice or a Supreme Court Judge, as the case may be, pursuant to clause (3), shall continue to be a judge of the High Court and may continue to perform the functions of the office of puisne judge.

109.	(1) There shall be a High Court for the Republic which shall have unlimited original jurisdiction to hear and determine any civil or criminal proceedings under any law and such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other law.

(2)	(a) The Chief Justice shall be ex officio a judge of the High Court.

(b) The other judges of the High Court shall be such number of puisne judges as may be prescribed by Parliament.

(3)	The office of a puisne judge shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof.

(4)	The High Court shall be a superior court of record and, save as otherwise provided by Parliament, shall have all the powers of such a court.

(5)	The High Court shall have jurisdiction to supervise any civil or criminal proceedings before any subordinate court or any court-martial and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of ensuring that justice is duly administered by any such court.

(6)	The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice and procedure of the High Court in relation to the jurisdiction and powers conferred on it by clause (5).

110.	(1) The puisne judges shall be appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission,

(2)	If the office of any puisne judge is vacant, or if any such judge is appointed to act as a judge of the Supreme Court or is on leave or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, or if the President, acting after consultation with the Chief Justice, is satisfied that the state of business in the High Court requires that the number of judges of that court should be temporarily increased, the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may appoint. a person qualified for appointment as a judge of the High Court to act as a puisne judge of that court:

Provided that a person may act as a puisne judge notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed by Article 113.

111.	Any person appointed under Article 108 or 110 to act as a judge of the Supreme Court or a puisne judge, as the case may be, shall continue to act for the period of his appointment or, if no such period is specified, until his appointment is revoked by the President, acting in the case of a puisne judge in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission:

Provided that the President, acting in the case of a puisne judge in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a person whose appointment to act as a judge of the Supreme Court or a puisne judge has expired or been revoked to continue to act as such a judge for such a period as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto.

112.	(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (2), a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court or a puisne judge unless—

(a)	he holds or has held high judicial office; or

(b)	he holds one of the specified qualifications and has held one or other of those qualifications for a total period of not less than seven years.

(2)	Where the President or the Judicial Service Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied that by reason of special circumstances a person who holds one of the specified qualifications is worthy, capable and suitable to be appointed as a judge of the Supreme Court or a puisne judge notwithstanding that he has not held some one or other of those qualifications for a total period of not less than seven years, the President, acting in the case of a puisne judge in accordance with the advice of the

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Act No. 22 of 1973

Tenure of office of judges of Supreme Court and High Court

Judicial Service Commission, may dispense with the requirement that such person shall have held some one or other of the specified qualifications for a total period of not less than seven years and may appoint him a judge of the Supreme Court or a puisne judge.

(3)	In this Article “ the specified qualifications ” means the professional qualifications specified in the Legal Practitioners Act, 1973, or in any law amending or replacing that Act one of which must be held by any person before he may apply under that Act or under any such law to be admitted as a practitioner in the Republic.

(4)	For the purposes of this Article and of Articles 108 and 110 “ a person qualified for appointment ” as a judge of the Supreme Court or a puisne judge includes such a person as is referred to in clause (2).

113.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, a person holding the office of a judge of the Supreme Court or the office of a judge of the High Court shall vacate that office on attaining the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that the President, acting in the case of a judge of the High Court in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a judge who has attained that age to continue in office for such period as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that age.

(2)	A judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(3)	If the President considers that the question of removing a judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court under this Article ought to be investigated then—

(a)	he shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a

Chairman and not less than two other members, who hold or have held high judicial office;

(b)	the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on

the facts thereof to the President and advise the President whether the judge ought to be removed from office under this Article for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.

(4)	Where a tribunal appointed under clause (3) advises the President that a judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour, the President shall remove such judge from office.

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(5)	If the question of removing a judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court from office has been referred to a tribunal under clause (3), the President may suspend the judge from performing the functions of his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President that the judge ought not to be removed from office.

(6)	For the purposes of this Article “ misbehaviour ” includes a breach of the Leadership Code.

(7)	The provisions of this Article shall be without prejudice to the provisions of Article 111.

114.	A judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by Parliament:

Provided that a person who has taken and subscribed the said oaths may enter upon the duties of any office of judge of the Supreme Court or judge of the High Court to which he may be appointed to act without again taking and subscribing such oaths.

Judicial Service Commission

115.	(1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission for the Republic which shall consist of—

(a)	the Chief Justice, who shall be Chairman;

(b)	the Attorney-General;

(c)	the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or such

other member of that Commission as may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Chairman of that Commission;

(d)	such judge of the Supreme Court or puisne judge as

may for the time being be designated in that behalf by the Chief Justice; and

(e)	one other member who shall be appointed by the

President.

(2) The following provisions shall apply in relation to a member of the Judicial Service Commission referred to in clause (1) (e):

(а)	a person shall not be qualified for appointment as

such unless he holds or has held high judicial office;

(б)	subject to the provisions of this clause, a person

appointed as such shall vacate his office at the expiration of two years from the date of his appointment; and

(c)	a person appointed as such may be removed from office by the President, but he may be removed only

Oaths to be taken by judge

Judicial

Service

Commission

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Appointment, etc., of judicial officers

Cap. 45

for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.

(3)	The President may give to the Judicial Service Commission or to any person to whom the powers of the Commission are delegated under Article 116 such general directions with respect to the exercise of the functions of the Commission under that Article as the President may consider necessary and the Commission or that person shall comply with such directions.

(4)	Except as provided in clause (3) the Judicial Service Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in the exercise of its functions under this Constitution.

116.	(1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices to which this Article applies (including power to confirm appointments), to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and to remove such persons from office shall vest in the Judicial Service Commission acting in the name and on behalf of the President.

(2)	The Judicial Service Commission may, subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, delegate any of its powers under this Article by directions in writing to any member of the Commission, any judge of the Supreme Court or any judge of the High Court, or to any person holding or acting in any office to which this Article applies.

(3)	The offices to which this Article applies are:

(а)	the office of Master or Deputy Master or Assistant

Master of the Supreme Court;

(б)	the office of Registrar or Deputy Registrar or Assistant

Registrar of the High Court;

(c)	the office of Senior Resident Magistrate, Resident

Magistrate or Magistrate;

(d)	the office of presiding officer or member of any sub-

ordinate court; or

(e)	such other offices of presiding officer or member of any

court of law or connected with any court of law as

may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

(4)	In this Article references to the office of Magistrate do not include references to any administrative office the holders of which are, under the provisions of the Subordinate Courts Act, entitled by virtue of that office to hold a subordinate court, and references to a court of law do not include references to a court-martial or to the Industrial Relations Court.

PART IX Commission for Investigations

117.	(1) There shall be a Commission for Investigations (in this Part referred to as the Commission) which shall have jurisdiction to inquire into the conduct of any person to whom this Article applies in the exercise of his office or authority, or in abuse thereof.

(2)	Subject to the provisions of this Article, the Commission shall inquire into the conduct of any such person as aforesaid whenever so directed by the President and may, unless the President otherwise directs, inquire into such conduct in any case in which it considers that an allegation of misconduct or abuse of office or authority by any such person ought to be investigated.

(3)	The Commission shall—

(a)	submit to the President a report on the proceedings of every inquiry together with its conclusions and recommendations;

(b)	submit annually to the National Assembly a summary

of such reports.

(4)	This Article shall apply to—

(a)	any person in the service of the Republic;

(b)	any person holding office in the Party;

(c)	the members and persons in the service of a local

authority;

(d)	the members and persons in the service of statutory

corporations, bodies or boards, including institutions of higher learning, established wholly or partly out of public funds;

(e)	the members and persons in the service of any Commission established by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament;

but shall not apply to the President.

(5)	Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (4), the Commission shall have no power to question or review any decision of any court or of any judicial officer in the exercise of his judicial functions, or any decision of a tribunal established by law for the performance of judicial functions in the exercise of such functions, or any matter which is sub judice, or any matter relating to the exercise of the prerogative of mercy.

118.	(1) The Commission shall consist of an Investigator-General, who shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission and shall be the chairman, and three Commissioners who shall be appointed by the President.

(2)	The following provisions shall apply in relation to the Investigator-General:

(а)	a person shall not be qualified for appointment as such

unless he is qualified to be appointed a judge of the High Court;

(б)	a person appointed as such shall vacate his office on

attaining the age of sixty-five years:

Provided that the President may permit a person who has attained that age to continue in office for such period as may be necessary to complete and submit any report on, or to do any other thing in relation to, any investigation that was commenced by him before he attained that age;

(c)	a person appointed as such may be removed from office for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(3)	If the National Assembly, by a resolution supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the Assembly, resolves that the question of removing the Investigator-General ought to be investigated, the Speaker of the Assembly shall send a copy of such resolution to the Chief Justice who shall appoint a tribunal consisting of a chairman and two other persons to inquire into the matter.

(4)	The chairman and one other member of the tribunal shall be persons who hold or have held high judicial office.

(5)	The tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the President.

(6)	Where a tribunal appointed under clause (3) advises the President that the Investigator-General ought to be removed from office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour, the President shall remove the Investigator-General from office.

(7)	If the question of removing the Investigator-General from office has been referred to a tribunal under clause (3) the President may suspend him from performing the functions of his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal advises the President that the Investigator-General ought not to be removed.

(8)	For the purposes of the foregoing clauses of this Article “ misbehaviour ” includes a breach of the Leadership Code.

(9)	The following provisions shall apply to a Commissioner:

(a) subject to the provisions of this clause, a person appointed as such shall vacate his office at the expiration of three years from the date of his appointment,

and shall not be qualified to be reappointed as such within three years of his last ceasing to hold such office;

(6)	a person appointed as such may be removed from office by the President for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.

(10)	A person appointed as Investigator-General or a Commissioner shall forthwith vacate any office prescribed by Act of Parliament and any office in the Party.

(11)	The Commission may act notwithstanding any vacancy or the absence of any member.

119.	Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may provide for the powers and immunities of the Commission and its procedure, and generally for the purpose of enabling the Commission to perform the functions conferred upon it by this Constitution or any other law.

PART X Finance

120.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, no taxation shall be imposed or altered except by or under an Act of Parliament.

(2)	Save as provided by clauses (3) and (4), Parliament shall not confer upon any other person or authority power to impose or to alter (otherwise than by reduction) any taxation.

(3)	Parliament may make provision under which the President or a Minister may by order provide that, on or after the publication of a bill (being a bill approved by the President) that it is proposed to introduce into the National Assembly providing for the imposition or alteration of taxation, such provisions of the bill as may be specified in the order shall, until the bill becomes law, have the force of law for such period and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament:

Provided that any such order shall, unless sooner revoked, cease to have effect—

(i)	if the bill to which it relates is not passed within such period from the date of its first reading in the National Assembly as may be prescribed by Parliament;

(ii)	if, after the introduction of the bill to which it relates, Parliament is prorogued or dissolved;

(iii)	if, after the passage of the bill to which it relates, the President refuses his assent thereto; or

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

Withdrawal of moneys from general revenues

(iv)	at the expiration of a period of four months from the date it came into operation or such longer period from that date as may be specified in any resolution passed by the National Assembly after the bill to which it relates has been introduced.

(4)	Parliament may confer upon any authority established by law for the purposes of local government power to impose taxation within the area for which that authority is established and to alter taxation so imposed.

(5)	Where the Appropriation Act in respect of a financial year has not come into force at the expiration of six months from the commencement of that financial year, the operation of any law relating to the collection or recovery of any tax upon any income or profits or any duty of customs or excise shall be suspended until that Act comes into force:

Provided that—

(i)	in any financial year in which Parliament stands dissolved at the commencement of that year the period of six months shall begin from the day upon which the National Assembly first sits following that dissolution instead of from the commencement of the financial year;

(ii)	the provisions of this clause shall not apply in any financial year in which Parliament is dissolved after the laying of estimates in accordance with Article 123 and before the Appropriation bill relating to those estimates is passed by the National Assembly.

121.	(1) No moneys shall be expended from the general revenues of the Republic unless—

(a)	the expenditure is authorised by a warrant under the hand of the President;

(b)	the expenditure is charged by this Constitution or any other law on the general revenues of the Republic; or

(c)	the expenditure is of moneys received by a department of Government and is made under the provisions of any law which authorises that department to retain and expend those moneys for defraying the expenses of the department.

(2)	No warrant shall be issued by the President authorising expenditure from the general revenues of the Republic unless—

(a)	the expenditure is authorised by an Appropriation Act;

(b)	the expenditure is necessary to carry on the services

of the Government in respect of any period (not exceeding four months) beginning at the commencement of a financial year during which the Appropriation Act for that financial year is not in force;

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(c)	the expenditure has been proposed in a supplementary estimate approved by the National Assembly;

(d)	no provision exists for the expenditure and the President considers that there is such an urgent need to incur the expenditure that it would not be in the public interest to delay the authorisation of the expenditure until such time as a supplementary estimate can be laid before and approved by the National Assembly; or

(e)	the expenditure is incurred on capital projects con-

tinuing from the previous financial year until the commencement of the Appropriation Act for the current financial year.

(3)	The President shall, immediately after he has signed any warrant authorising expenditure from the general revenues of the Republic, cause a copy of the warrant to he transmitted to the Auditor-General.

(4)	The issue of warrants under clause (2) (d), the investment of moneys forming part of the general revenues of the Republic and the making of advances from such revenues shall be subject to such limitations and conditions as Parliament may from time to time prescribe.

(5)	For the purposes of this Article the investment of moneys forming part of the general revenues of the Republic or the making of recoverable advances therefrom shall not be regarded as expenditure, and the expression “ investment of moneys ” shall mean investment in readily marketable securities and deposits with the Zambia National Building Society approved by the Minister responsible for finance.

122.	Where in any financial year any expenditure has been authorised by a warrant issued by the President under Article 121 (2) (e£), the Minister responsible for finance shall cause a supplementary estimate relating to that expenditure to be laid before the National Assembly for its approval before the expiration of a period of four months from the issue of the warrant or, if the National Assembly is not sitting at the expiration of that period, at the first sitting of the National Assembly thereafter.

123.	(1) The Minister responsible for finance shall cause to be prepared and shall lay before the National Assembly within one month of the commencement of each financial year estimates of the revenues and expenditure of the Republic for that financial year, and such estimates shall include a sum to be granted to the Party as a subsidy for that year.

(2)	When the estimates of expenditure (other than expenditure charged upon the general revenues of the Republic by this Constitution or any law) have been approved by the National Assembly, the heads of the estimates together with the amount approved in respect of each head shall be included

Remuneration of certain officers

in a bill to be known as an Appropriation bill which shall be introduced in the Assembly to provide for the payment of those amounts for the purposes specified out of the general revenues of the Republic.

(3)	Where any supplementary expenditure has been authorised in respect of any financial year for any purposes and—

(a)	no amount has been appropriated for that purpose under any head of expenditure by the Appropriation Act for that financial year; or

(b)	the amount of the supplementary expenditure is such that the total amount expended for the purposes of the head of expenditure in which expenditure for that purpose was included is in excess of the amount so appropriated under that head;

the Minister responsible for finance shall introduce in the National Assembly not later than fifteen months after the end of that financial year or, if the National Assembly is not sitting at the expiration of that period, within one month of the first sitting of the National Assembly thereafter, a bill, to be known as a Supplementary Appropriation bill, confirming the approval of Parliament of such expenditure, or excess of expenditure, as the case may be.

(4)	Where, in any financial year, expenditure has been incurred without the authorisation of the National Assembly, the Minister responsible for finance shall, on approval of such expenditure by the Public Accounts Committee, introduce in the National Assembly, not later than thirty months after the end of that financial jmar or, if the National Assembly is not sitting at the expiration of that period, within one month of the first sitting of the National Assembly, a bill to be known as the Excess Expenditure Appropriation bill, for the approval by Parliament of such expenditure.

124.	(1) The Minister responsible for finance shall cause to be prepared and shall lay before the National Assembly not later than nine months after the end of each financial year a financial report in respect of that year.

(2)	A financial report in respect of a financial year shall include accounts showing the revenue and other moneys received by the Government in that financial year, the expenditure of the Government in that financial year other than expenditure charged by this Constitution or any other law on the general revenues of the Republic, the payments made in that financial year otherwise than for the purposes of expenditure, a statement of the financial position of the Republic at the end of the financial year and such other information as Parliament may prescribe.

125.	(1) There shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this Article applies such salary and such allowances as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

(2)	The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of the offices to which this Article applies shall be a charge on the general revenues of the Republic.

(3)	The salary payable to the holder of any office to which this Article applies and his terms of office, other than allowances, shall not be altered to his disadvantage after his appointment.

(4)	Where a person’s salary or terms of office depend upon his option, the salary or terms for which he opts shall, for the purposes of clause (3), be deemed to be more advantageous to him than any others for which he might have opted.

(5)	This Article applies to the offices of judge of the Supreme Court, judge of the High Court, Investigator-General, Director of Public Prosecutions and Auditor-General.

126.	(1) There shall be charged on the general revenues of the Republic all debt charges for which the Government is liable.

(2)	For the purposes of this Article debt charges include interest, sinking fund charges, the repayment or amortisation of debt, and all expenditure in connection with the raising of loans on the security of the revenues of the former Protectorate of Northern Rhodesia or the Republic and on the service and redemption of debt thereby created.

127.	Expenditure of the Government for purposes of defence and public security shall, unless the President, by statutory instrument, otherwise orders in respect of any head of such expenditure, be charged on the general revenues of the Republic.

128.	(1) There shall be an Auditor-General for the Republic whose office shall be a public office and who shall be appointed by the President.

(2)	It shall be the duty of the Auditor-General—

(a)	to satisfy himself that the provisions of this Part are being complied with;

(b)	to satisfy himself that the moneys expended have been applied to the purposes for which they were appropriated by the Appropriation Act or in accordance with the approved supplementary estimates, or in accordance with the Excess Expenditure Appropriation Act, as the case may be, and that the expenditure conforms to the authority that governs it;

(c)	to audit the accounts relating to the general revenues of the Republic and the expenditure of moneys appropriated by Parliament, the accounts of the Clerk of the National Assembly, the accounts relating to the

stocks and stores of the Government and the accounts of such other bodies as may be prescribed by or under any law;

(cl) to audit the accounts relating to any expenditure charged by this Constitution or any other law on the general revenues of the Republic and to submit a report thereon to the President not later than twelve months after the end of each financial year.

(3)	The Auditor-General and any officer authorised by him shall have access to all books, records, returns, reports and other documents relating to any of the accounts referred to in clause (2),

(4)	The Auditor-General shall, not later than twelve months after the end of each financial year, submit a report on the accounts referred to in clause (2) (c) in respect of that financial year to the President who shall, not later than seven days'after the first sitting of the National Assembly next after the receipt of such report, cause it to be laid before the Assembly; and if the President makes default in laying the report before the Assembly, the Auditor-General shall submit the report to the Speaker of the Assembly (or, if the office of Speaker is vacant or if the Speaker is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, to the Deputy Speaker) who shall cause it to be laid before the Assembly.

(5)	The Auditor-General shall perform such other duties and exercise such other powers in relation to all accounts of the Government or the accounts of other public authorities or other bodies as may be prescribed by or under any law.

(6)	In the exercise of his functions under clauses (2), (3) and

(4), the Auditor-General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.

129.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, a person holding the office of Auditor-General shall vacate his office when he attains the age of sixty years.

(2)	A person holding the office of Auditor-General may be removed from office only for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour and shall not be so removed except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(3)	If the National Assembly resolves that the question of removing a person holding the office of Auditor-General from office under this Article ought to be investigated then—

(a)	the Assembly shall, by resolution, appoint a tribunal which shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other members, who hold or have held high judicial office;

(6)	the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the facts thereof to the Assembly;

(c)	the Assembly shall consider the report of the tribunal at the first convenient sitting of the Assembly after it is received and may, upon such consideration, by resolution, remove the Auditor-General from office.

(4)	If the question of removing a person holding the office of Auditor-General from office has been referred to a tribunal under this Article, the National Assembly may, by resolution, suspend that person from performing the functions of his office, and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the Assembly by resolution and shall in any case cease to have effect if, upon consideration of the report of the tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this Article, the Assembly does not remove the Auditor-General from office.

(5)	For the purposes of this Article “ misbehaviour ” includes a breach of the Leadership Code.

PART XI Service Commissions

130.	(1) There shall be the following Commissions for the Republic:

(a)	a Public Service Commission;

(b)	a Teaching Service Commission; and

(c)	a Police and Prison Service Commission.

(2)	Unless the context otherwise requires, in this Part “ Commission ” means any of the foregoing Commissions.

(3)	Parliament may make provision—

(a)	for the establishment of a commission for the local government service or any other service; or

(b)	for establishing any other service and conferring powers upon any person or authority to appoint persons to hold or to act in any posts or offices in such service (including power to confirm appointments), to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such posts or offices and to remove such persons therefrom.

131.	(1) A Commission shall consist of a Chairman and not less than three nor more than six other members.

(2)	The members of a Commission shall be appointed by the President.

(3)	A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of a Commission if he holds the office of President or is a member of the National Assembly or a public officer:

Provided that a public officer shall be qualified for appointment as a member of the Police and Prison Service Commission.

(4)	Subject to the provisions of this Article, the office of a member of a Commission shall become vacant—

(a)	at the expiration of two years from the date of his appointment; or

(b)	if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified for appointment as such; or

(c)	in the case of a member on a full-time basis, in the circumstances set out in Article 34 (2).

(5)	A member of a Commission may be removed from office by the President for inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.

(6)	A member of a Commission shall not be removed from office except in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(7)	If the office of Chairman of a Commission is vacant or if the person holding that office is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has resumed those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed by such one of the other members of the Commission as may be designated in that behalf by the President.

(8)	If at any time there are less than two members of a Commission besides the Chairman or if any such member is appointed to act as Chairman or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person who is qualified for appointment as a member of such Commission to act as a member, and any person so appointed shall, subject to the provisions of clause (4) (6) and (c), continue to act until the office in which he is acting is filled or, as the case may be, until the holder thereof resumes his functions or until his appointment to act is revoked by the President.

(9)	The President may give to a Commission or to any public officer to whom the functions of such Commission are delegated under Article 132 (4) such general directions with respect to the exercise of the functions of the Commission under that Article as the President may consider necessary and the Commission or that public officer shall comply with those directions.

(10)	The President may require a Commission or any public officer to whom the functions of such Commission are delegated

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

to refer any matter relating to the functions of that Commission under Article 132 which is under consideration by the Commission or that public officer, as the case may be, to the President and the President may himself in such a case exercise any of the powers conferred by clause (1) of that Article.

(11)	Except as provided in clauses (9) and (10), a Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in the exercise of its functions under this Constitution.

132.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Article, power to appoint persons to hold or to act in any office in—

(а)	the public service;

(б)	the teaching service;

(c)	the Zambia Police Force; and

(d)	the Zambia prison service;

(including power to confirm appointments), to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and to remove any such person from office shall vest in the President.

(2)	The President shall consult the Commission in question—

(a)	before exercising the powers conferred by clause (1) in any case in relation to the office of Secretary to the Cabinet, Permanent Secretary, Inspector-General of Police or Commissioner of Police or to any person holding or acting in any of those offices;

(b)	before exercising the power to appoint to the office of Ambassador, High Commissioner or principal representative of Zambia in another country any person who holds an office in any service mentioned in clause

(1)	other than such an office;

(c)	before exercising the power to exercise disciplinary control over or to remove from any office of Ambassador, High Commissioner or principal representative of Zambia in another country any person who, immediately before he was appointed to that office, held some other office in any service mentioned in clause (1).

(3)	Subject to the following provisions of this Part, the powers of the President to make appointments to any office in a service mentioned in clause (1) (other than an office mentioned in clause (2)) and to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such offices and to remove such persons from office shall be exercised—

(a)	in relation to any office in the teaching service, by the Teaching Service Commission;

(b)	in relation to an}' office in the Zambia Police Force or in the Zambia prison service, by the Police and Prison Service Commission;

No. 27 of 1973] Constitution of Zambia

(c)	in relation to any other public office, by the Public Service Commission;

acting in the name and on behalf of the President.

(4)	A Commission may, by directions in writing and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, delegate any of its functions under clause (3) to any public officer in the service in question.

(5)	The provisions of this Article shall not apply in relation to—

(a)	any office of judge of the Supreme Court, judge of the High Court, Investigator-General or Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the Industrial Relations Court;

(b)	any office to which Article 116 applies;

(c)	except for the purpose of making appointments thereto or to act therein, the office of Director of Public Prosecutions or Auditor-General.

(6)	A person who holds or has held the office of Auditor-General shall not be appointed to hold or to act in any other public office.

133.	(1) The law to be applied with respect to any pensions benefits that were granted to any person before the commencement of this Constitution shall be the law that was in force at the date on which those benefits were granted or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.

(2)	The law to be applied with respect to any pensions benefits (not being benefits to which clause (1) applies) shall—

(а)	in so far as those benefits are wholly in respect of a period of service as a public officer, as any officer in the department of the Clerk of the National Assembly or as a member of the armed forces that commenced before the commencement of this Constitution, be the law that was in force immediately before that date; and

(б)	in so far as those benefits are wholly or partly in respect of a period of service as a public officer, as any officer in the department of the Clerk of the National Assembly or as a member of the armed forces that commenced after the commencement of this Constitution, be the law in force on the date on which that period of service commenced;

or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.

(3)	Where a person is entitled to exercise an option as to which of two or more laws shall apply in his case, the law for

which he opts shall, for the purposes of this Article, be deemed to be more favourable to him than the other law or laws.

(4)	All pensions benefits shall, except to the extent to which they are a charge on a fund established by or under any law and have been duly paid out of that fund to the person or authority to whom payment is due, be a charge on the general revenues of the Republic.

(5)	In this Article “ pensions benefits ” means any pensions, compensation, gratuities or other like allowances for persons in respect of their service as public officers, as officers in the department of the Clerk of the National Assembly or as members of the armed forces or for the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service.

(6)	Reference in this Article to the law with respect to pensions benefits include (without prejudice to their generality) references to the law regulating the circumstances in which such benefits may be granted or in which the grant of such benefits may be refused, the law regulating the circumstances in which any such benefits that have been granted may be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended, and the law regulating the amount of any such benefits.

(7)	In this Article references to service as a public officer includes references to service as a public officer under the Government of the territories which on 24th October, 1964, became the sovereign Republic of Zambia and references to service as a member of the teaching service of the said Government, references to service as an officer in the department of the Clerk of the National Assembly include references to service as an officer in the department of the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of the said territories and references to service as a member of the armed forces include references to service as a member of the armed forces of the said territories.

134.	(1) Where under any law any person or authority has a discretion—

(a)	to decide whether or not any pensions benefits shall be granted; or

(b)	to withhold, reduce in amount or suspend any such benefits that have been granted;

those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the appropriate Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them ' in amount or suspend them.

(2) Where the amount of any pensions benefits that may be granted to any person is not fixed by law, the amount of the benefits to be granted to him shall be the greatest amount for

Power of Commissions in relation to pensions, eto.

which he is eligible unless the appropriate Commission concurs in his being granted benefits of a smaller amount.

(3)	In this Article “ the appropriate Commission ” means—

(a) in the case of benefits for which any person may be eligible in respect of the service in the public service of a person who, immediately before he ceased to be a public officer, was subject to the disciplinary control of the Judicial Service Commission or that have been granted in respect of such service, the Judicial Service Commission;

(ib) in the case of benefits for which any person may be eligible in respect of the service in the public service of a person who, immediately before he ceased to be a public officer, was subject to the disciplinary control of the Teaching Service Commission or that have been granted in respect of such service, the Teaching Service Commission;

(c)	in the case of benefits for which any person may be eligible in respect of the service in the public service of a person who, immediately before he ceased to be a public officer, was subject to the disciplinary control of the Police and Prison Service Commission or that have been granted in respect of such service, the Police and Prison Service Commission;

(d)	in any other case, the Public Service Commission.

(4)	In this Article “ pensions benefits ” means any pensions, compensation, gratuities or other like allowances for persons in respect of their service as public officers (including service as members of the teaching service of, and service as public officers under, the Government of the territories which on the 24th October, 1964, became the sovereign Republic of Zambia) or for the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such service.

PART XIII Miscellaneous

135.	(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, any Commission established by this Constitution may, with the consent of the President, by regulation or otherwise regulate its own procedure or confer power or impose duties on any officer or authority of the Government for the purpose of discharging its functions.

(2) Any decision of any Commission established by this Constitution shall require the support of the votes of the majority of all the members of the Commission:

Provided that, if upon any question the votes of the members of a Commission are equally divided, the Chairman of that Commission shall have a casting vote.

(3)	Subject to the provisions of clause (2), any Commission established by this Constitution may act notwithstanding the absence of any member or, in the case of the Judicial Service Commission, any vacancy in the office of the member referred to in Article 115 (1) (e).

(4)	Subject to the provisions of this Article, any Commission established by this Constitution may determine its own procedure.

(5)	References in this Article to a Commission established by this Constitution includes references to an Electoral Commission established under Article 73.

136.	(1) Any person who is appointed or elected to any office established by this Constitution may resign from that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed or elected:

Provided that in the case of a person who holds office as President his resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Chief Justice, in the case of a person who holds office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly his resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Assembly, and in the case of an elected member of the Assembly his resignation shall be addressed to the Speaker.

(2) The resignation of any person from any office established by this Constitution shall take effect when the writing signifying the resignation is received by the person or authority to whom it is addressed or by any person authorised by that person or authority to receive it.

137.	(1) Where any person has vacated any office established by this Constitution, he may, if qualified, again be appointed or elected to hold that office in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

(2) Where a power is conferred by this Constitution upon any person to make any appointment' to any office, a person may be appointed to that office notwithstanding that some other person may be holding that office, when that other person is on leave of absence pending the relinquishment of the office; and where two or more persons are holding the same office by reason of an appointment made in pursuance of this clause, then, for the purposes of any function conferred upon the holder of that office, the person last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder of the office.

138.	(1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires—

“ Act of Parliament ” means a law enacted by Parliament;

“ Article ” means an Article of this Constitution;

“ Central Committee ” means the Central Committee of the Party;

Cap. 479

“ Chief ” means a person who is recognised by the President under the provisions of the Chiefs Act or any law amending or replacing that Act as the Litunga of Western Province, a Paramount Chief, Senior Chief, Chief or Sub-Chief or a person who is appointed as Deputy Chief;

“ the Commonwealth ” includes any dependency of a country which is a member of the Commonwealth;

“ clause ” means a clause of the Article in which the word occurs;

“ financial year ” means the period of twelve months ending on 31st December in any year or on such, other day as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament:

Provided that by or under an Act of Parliament prescribing a day other than the 31st December as the terminal day of the financial year the said period of twelve months may be extended or reduced for any one financial year for the purpose of effecting such prescribed change;

“ the Gazette ” means the official Gazette of the Government of Zambia;

“ High Court ” means the High Court established by this Constitution;

“ high judicial office ” means the office of a judge of a court of unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth or in the Republic of Ireland or the office of judge of a court-having jurisdiction in appeals from such a court;

“ Junior Minister ” means a Minister of State or a Parliamentary Secretary;

“ meeting ” means all sittings of the National Assembly held during a period beginning when the Assembly first sits after being summoned at any time and terminating when the Assembly is adjourned sine die or at the conclusion of a session;

“ oath ” includes affirmation;

“ the oath of allegiance ” means such oath of allegiance as may be prescribed by law;

“ paragraph ” means a paragraph of the clause in which the word occurs;

“ person ” includes any company or association or body of persons, corporate or unincorporate;

“ public office ” means an office of emolument in the public service, but shall not include an office constituted by the President and declared by him under Article 62 not to be an office in the public service;

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

“ public officer ” means a person holding or acting in any piiblic office;

“ the public service ” means, subject to the provisions of clauses (2) and (3), the civil service of the Government;

“ session ” means the sittings of the National Assembly beginning when it first sits after the coming into operation of this Constitution or after Parliament is prorogued or dissolved at any time and ending when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;

sitting ” means a period during which the National Assembly is sitting without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee;

statutory instrument ” means any Proclamation, regulation, order, rule, notice or other instrument (not being an Act of Parliament) of a legislative, as distinct from an executive, character;

subordinate court ” means any court established for the Republic other than—

(a)	the Supreme Court;

(b)	the High Court;

(c)	a court-martial; or

(d)	the Industrial Relations Court;

Supreme Court ” means the Supreme Court of Zambia established by this Constitution.

(2)	In this Constitution references to offices in the public service shall be construed as including references to the offices •of judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Court.

(3)	In this Constitution references to an office in the public service shall not be construed as including references to the office of the Attorney-General, or a member of any Commission established by this Constitution or to the office of the Clerk of the National Assembly or any office in the department of the •Clerk of the National Assembly.

(4)	For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be considered as holding a public office by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in •respect of service under the Government of Zambia or of its predecessor Government.

(5)	A person shall not be regarded as disqualified for appointment to any office to which a public officer is not qualified to be -appointed by reason only that he holds a public office if he is •on leave of absence pending relinquishment of that office.

(6)	In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, a reference to the holder of an office by the term designating his office shall be construed as including a reference to any person for the time being lawfully acting in or performing the functions of that office:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to references to the President or Prime Minister in Article 40, 41, 43, 48 or 49.

(7)	References in this Constitution to the power to remove a public o’fficer from his office shall be construed as including references to any power conferred by any law to require or permit that officer to retire from the public service:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as conferring on any person or authority power to require a judge of the Supreme Court or of the High Court, the Investigator-General, the Auditor-General or the Director of Public Prosecutions to retire from the public service.

(8)	Any provision in this Constitution that vests in any person or authority power to remove any public officer from his office shall be without prejudice to the power of any person or authority to abolish any office or to any law providing for the compulsory retirement of public officers generally or any class of public officer on attaining an age specified therein.

(9)	Where power is vested by this Constitution in any person or authority to appoint any person to act in or perform the functions of any office if the holder thereof is himself unable to perform those functions, no such appointment shall be called in question on the ground that the holder of the office was not unable to perform those functions.

(10)	No provision of this Constitution that any person or authority shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in the exercise of any functions under this Constitution shall be construed as precluding a court of law from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether that person or authority has performed those functions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.

(11)	In this Constitution, whenever any Province, District or other area is referred to by name, the provision in question shall be read and construed as a reference to such Province, District or other area—

(a) by the name currently assigned thereto by any law; and

(£>) as from time to time delimited by or under the provisions of any law.

(12)	Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make any Proclamation, statutory instrument, order, regulation or rule, or to issue any direction or certificate or confer

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

recognition, the power shall be construed as including the power, exercisable in like manner, to amend or revoke any such Proclamation, statutory instrument, order, regulation, rule, direction or certificate or to withdraw any such recognition:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the power to issue a certificate conferred by Article 40 (2).

(13)	(a) Any reference in this Constitution to a law that amends or replaces any other law shall be construed as including a reference to a law that modifies, re-enacts with or without amendment or modification, or makes different provision in lieu of that other law.

(6)	Where any Act passed after the commencement of this Constitution repeals and re-enacts, with or without modification, any provisions thereof, references in this Constitution to the provisions so repealed shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be construed as references to the provisions so reenacted.

(c) Where any Act passed after the commencement of this Constitution repeals any provision thereof then, unless the contrary intention appears, the repeal shall not—

(i)	revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect; or

(ii)	affect the previous operation of any provision so repealed or anything duly done or suffered under any provision so repealed; or

(iii)	affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any provision so repealed; or

(iv)	affect any penalty, forfeiture or confiscation or punishment incurred under any provision so repealed; or

(v)	affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or confiscation or punishment as aforesaid, and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or confiscation or punishment may be imposed, as if the repealing Act had not been passed.

(14) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, words and expressions importing the masculine gender includes females.

(15) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, words and expressions in the singular include the plural and words and expressions in the plural include the singular.

(16)	Where this Constitution confers any power or imposes any duty, the power may be exercised and the duty shall be performed from time to time as occasion requires.

(17)	Where by any Act which repeals and re-enacts, with or without modification, any provision of this Constitution, and which is not to come into force immediately on the publication thereof, there is conferred—

(a)	a power to make or a power exercisable by making statutory instruments; or

(b)	a power to make appointments; or

(c)	a power to do any other thing for the purposes of the provision in question;

that power may be exercised at any time on or after the date of publication of the Act in the Gazette:

Provided that no instrument, appointment or thing made or done under that power shall, unless it is necessary to bring the Act into force, have any effect until the commencement of the Act.

(18)	In computing time for the purposes of any provision of this Constitution, unless a contrary intention is expressed—

(а)	a period of days from the happening of an event or the

doing of any act or thing shall be deemed to be exclusive of the day on which the event happens or the act or thing is done;

(б)	if the last day of the period is Sunday or a public

holiday (which days are in this clause referred to as “ excluded days ”) the period shall include the next following day, not being an excluded day;

(c)	where any act or proceeding is directed or allowed to

be done or taken on a certain day, then, if that day happens to be an excluded day, the act or proceeding shall be considered as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day afterwards, not being an excluded day;

(d)	where an act or proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken within any time not exceeding six days, excluded days shall not be reckoned in the computation of the time.

SCHEDULE (Article 97)

Election of Members of House of Chiefs to Represent

Provinces

Notice of Election

1.	For the purpose of electing the members of the House of Chiefs in each province there shall be a Chiefs Provincial Council, which shall consist of all Chiefs resident within that Province.

2.	There shall be a returning officer for each Province who shall be such person as the President may appoint in that behalf.

3.	Whenever he is informed by the Chairman of the House of Chiefs that a vacancy or vacancies have occurred among the members of the House of Chiefs elected in the Province, the returning officer of the province shall, by notice published in such manner as may be prescribed by any law—

(a)	appoint a day, not being less than fourteen days after the notice is so published, as nomination day for an election to fill the vacancy or vacancies and prescribe the latest hour on that day by which nomination papers shall be delivered to him;

(b)	appoint a day, not being less than fourteen days after the day appointed as nomination day, on which, and prescribe a place at which and the hour at which a meeting of the Chiefs Provincial Council shall be held to take a ballot if the election is contested.

Nomination

4.	(1) No person shall be qualified to be nominated as a candidate in an election of a member of the House of Chiefs in a Province unless he is a member of the Chiefs Provincial Council of the Province.

(2)	Each candidate in the election shall be nominated by a separate nomination paper delivered to the returning officer not later than the expiration of the time prescribed for the delivery of nomination papers under paragraph 3.

(3)	A nomination paper shall—

(a)	be in the prescribed form and state the full name and place of residence of the candidate;

(b)	contain a statement signed by the candidate that he is willing to stand for election;

(c)	be signed by two members of the Chiefs Provincial Council as proposer and seconder.

5.	(1) The returning officer may hold a nomination invalid but only on one of the following grounds, that is to say—

(а)	that the nomination paper is not in the prescribed form;

(б)	that the nomination paper is not signed by the persons required by the provisions of this Schedule; or

(c)	that the nomination paper was not delivered as required by the provisions of this Schedule.

(2) The decision of the returning officer that a nomination is valid shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.

6.	A candidate in respect of whom a nomination paper has been delivered to the returning officer within the time allowed for the delivery of nomination papers may withdraw his candidature if notice in writing signed by him is delivered to the returning officer not later than the expiration of the time allowed for the delivery of nomination papers.

Method of Election

7.	(1) If, at the expiration of the time allowed for the delivery of nomination papers, the number of persons remaining validly nominated is more than the number of vacancies to be filled at the election, the persons to fill the vacancies in the House of Chiefs shall be elected from among the candidates so nominated by the votes of the Chiefs Provincial Council which shall be taken by ballot in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule.

(2) If, at the expiration of the time allowed for the delivery of nomination papers, the number of persons remaining validly nominated is equal to or less than the number of vacancies to be filled at the election the returning officer shall declare those persons to be elected.

8.	Where at an election it is necessary for a ballot to be taken the returning officer shall cause a statement to be prepared (showing the persons who, at the expiration of the time allowed for the delivery of nomination papers, remain validly nominated) and to be delivered to the members of the Chiefs Provincial Council.

9.	Where in a contested election a candidate in respect of whom a ballot is to be held dies before the commencement of the ballot the returning officer shall countermand the ballot and a fresh election to fill the vacancy or vacancies in the House of Chiefs shall be commenced in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule.

The Ballot

10.	The ballot of a member of the Chiefs Provincial Council shall consist of a ballot paper, in the prescribed form, containing the names of the persons remaining validly nominated at the

Constitution of Zambia [No. 27 of 1973

election, as given in their nomination papers, and opposite the name of each person a blank space in which the vote of the member of the Chiefs Provincial Council may be recorded.

11.	(1) The returning officer shall preside at any meeting of the Chiefs Provincial Council at which a ballot is taken.

(2)	The returning officer shall provide a ballot box which shall at all times during the taking of the ballot be kept locked.

(3)	The returning officer shall cause a ballot paper to be delivered to each member of the Chiefs Provincial Council who is present at the meeting of the Council when the ballot commences (other than a person to whom a ballot paper has been sent in accordance with paragraph 15).

(4)	A member of the Chiefs Provincial Council, on receiving a ballot paper, shall cast his vote by placing the mark “ X ” (and no other mark or writing) in the space on the ballot paper opposite the name of the candidate or candidates for whom he wishes to vote and shall then fold the paper so as to conceal his vote and proceed to the ballot box and insert the paper so folded into the box.

(5)	A member of the Chiefs Provincial Council shall be entitled to cast the number of votes equivalent to the number of vacancies to be filled, but he shall not cast more than one vote for any one candidate in any ballot.

12.	A member of the Chiefs Provincial Council who, by reason of blindness or other physical cause, is unable to mark a ballot paper delivered to him may request the assistance of the returning officer (but no other person) in casting his vote and the returning officer shall, if so requested, mark the ballot paper in the manner directed by the member.

13.	A member of the Chiefs Provincial Council who, having received a ballot paper, inadvertently deals with it in such a manner that it cannot be used as a ballot paper may, on returning it to the returning officer, obtain another ballot paper in its place.

14.	The returning officer shall, when he is satisfied that all members of the Chiefs Provincial Council present at the meeting at the commencement of the poll have had an opportunity to cast their votes, announce that the taking of the poll is concluded.

15.	(1) If the returning officer is satisfied that any member of the Chiefs Provincial Council will be unable to attend a meeting of the Council at which a ballot is to be taken by reason of physical incapacity or of the nature of the journey from that person’s residence to the place of meeting he may cause to be sent to that member a postal ballot paper in the prescribed form.

(2) Any Chief to whom a postal ballot paper has been sent in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph may cast his vote in the election to which the ballot paper relates by marking the ballot paper in the manner specified in paragraph 11 (4) and by causing the ballot paper to be delivered to the returning officer not later than 0900 hours on the day appointed for the taking of the ballot in the election.

Counting of Votes

16.	Immediately after the close of the poll the votes shall be counted by the returning officer.

17.	A ballot paper shall be void and shall not be counted if—

(a)	there are recorded on it more votes than one for any candidate;

(b)	there are recorded on it more votes than the member of the Chiefs Provincial Council is entitled to cast in the ballot;

(c)	there appears on it any writing, sign or mark by which the voter can be identified;

(d)	it is unmarked or the marking is uncertain; or

(e)	in the case of a postal ballot paper, it is not received by the returning officer within the time prescribed by paragraph 15.

18.	(1) When the result of the ballot has been ascertained, the returning officer shall cause to be prepared a list showing the candidates in order according to the number of votes received by each of them, the candidate or candidates who received the highest number of votes being placed first and those who received any lower number of votes being placed in descending order, those who received no votes being omitted from the list.

(2)	The returning officer shall declare as elected the candidates who stand in the first and each successive place on the list until the number of vacancies in respect of which the ballot was taken are filled.

(3)	Where, by reason of an equality of votes between them, the number of candidates in any place on the list who would otherwise fall to be declared elected under sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph exceed the number of vacancies to be filled, the returning officer shall decide between those candidates by lot in such manner as he may determine and shall declare the candidate or candidates (equal in number to the vacancies to be filled) on whom the lot falls to be elected.

(4)	Where any vacancies remain unfilled by reason that votes were given for a lesser number of candidates than the number of vacancies the returning officer shall cause a further ballot to be held to fill those vacancies.

19.	The returning officer shall send, to the Clerk of the House of Chiefs a statement in writing certifying the result of the election.

20.	In this Schedule “ the prescribed form ” means such form as may be prescribed by any law and until such form is so prescribed the corresponding form prescribed by the House of Chiefs Regulations.