<pre>
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 CONGO (LEOPOLDVILLE)'
 May 30, 1964
 PREAMBLE
 Proclaiming our adherence to the Universal Declaration of the Rights
 of Man;
 Desirous of safeguarding the values dear to us and of guaranteeing to
 the family, the natural basis of any human society, the special protection
 of the governmental authorities so as to ensure its cohesion and stability;
 Affirming our determination to consolidate our national unity and at
 the same time to respect our regional characteristics in order to promote
 our material well being and our moral and spiritual flowering within the
 paths of justice;
 We the Congolese people;
 Conscious of our responsibilities before God, the Nation, Africa and the
 World;
 Solemnly declare that we adopt this Constitution.
 TITLE I
 GENERAL DESCRIPTIONS
 Section 1. The territory and the sovereignty
 of the Republic
 Art. 1. The Democratic Republic of the Congo, within its frontiers of
 June 30, 1960, constitutes a sovereign, indivisible, democratic and social
 State.
 The emblem of the Republic is a sky blue flag with a yellow star in the
 I Text published in Prisence Congolaise, May 30, 1964, obtained by courtesy of the
 Greek Embassy, Leopoldville. The Editor translated this text although there are a
 number of lacunae and misprints because no more authentic text had been received
 from the Congo government up to the date of going to press. It is included in this
 Volume although its status is not clear.
 
 102
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 upper left hand corner and crossed by a red strip thinly edged with
 yellow.
 The national anthem is... 1
 Its motto is "Justice, Peace, Work."
 The coat of arms is... 1
 Art. 2. Noone may threaten the integrity of the territory of the Re-
 public.
 All the authorities both of the Republic and the provinces shall have
 the duty of safeguarding the integrity of the territory of the Republic.
 Art. 3. All power emanates from the people who exercise it through
 their representatives or by means of referendum.
 No section of the people nor any individual may usurp the exercise of
 this right.
 Art. 4. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is composed of the city
 of Leopoldville and the autonomous provinces hereinafter listed: the
 provinces of the Central Basin, Upper Congo, East Katanga, Kibali-Ituri,
 Central Kivu, Central Kingo, Kwango, Kwilu, Lake Leopold II, Lomami,
 Lualaba, Luluabourg, Maniema, Middle Congo, North Katanga, North
 Kivu, Sankuru, South Kasai, Ubangi, Uele and the Kasaian Union.
 The boundaries of the provinces and those of the city of Leopoldville
 shall be established by a national organic law.
 No dismemberment of one or more provinces to form new provinces
 may take place except by amendment of paragraph 1 of this article
 accomplished in accordance with the provisions of Articles 183 to 186
 and with the agreement of the populations concerned given by referendum.
 No fusion of one or more provinces in order to constitute a new province
 may take place except if the provincial assemblies concerned so request.
 The President of the Republic, to whom such a request shall have been
 referred by the Presidents of the Assemblies concerned, shall submit
 to the approval of the populations involved by referendum a bill of amend-
 ment drawn up in accordance with the request. If the referendum favors
 the adoption of the amendment, the President of the Republic shall
 promulgate it within the time limit specified in Article 53.
 In both cases covered by the preceding two paragraphs, the boundaries
 of any new province shall be established by a national organic law which
 shall amend the organic law referred to in the second paragraph of this
 article.
 A national organic law shall fix the rules of application of this article
 and shall stipulate how the institutions of the new province shall be set up.
 Art. 5. The provinces shall be autonomous within the limits set by this
 Constitution.
 Each province shall have separate juridical personality. Only the
 Republic, however, shall have international legal status.
 1 Blank in the original text.
 
 103
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Leopoldville, the capital of the Republic, shall be the seat of the national
 institutions enumerated in Article 53 : 1 to 4.
 The city of Leopoldville shall be entirely dependent on the central
 government which shall draw up its statute by a national organic law.
 Section 2. Nationality
 Art. 6. There shall be a single Congolese nationality.
 It shall be granted, as from June 30, 1960, to anyone, one of whose
 forefathers was a member of a tribe or of a part of a tribe established on
 Congolese territory before October 18, 1908.
 However, persons falling under paragraph 2 above who possess another
 nationality at the date of entry into force of this Constitution, shall not
 acquire Congolese nationality unless they claim it and renounce their
 foreign nationality by a declaration made in due form in accordance with
 a national law.
 Such a declaration must be made within twelve months from the date
 of entry into force of this Constitution provided they are at least 21 years
 old on that date. If they are less than 21 years of age, the declaration must
 be made within twelve months of reaching that age.
 Art. 7. Congolese nationality shall be aquired by filiation, naturali-
 zation, option, or by legal presumption, under the conditions stipulated
 by a national organic law. The conditions for loss of nationality shall be
 covered by the same law.
 Art. 8. Any Congolese national who voluntarily acquires the nationality
 of another State shall lose his Congolese nationality.
 Any Congolese who, at 21 years of age, possesses both Congolese and
 another nationality shall lose his Congolese nationality unless he has re-
 nounced his other nationality in accordance with the forms stipulated by
 national law.
 Section 3. International Treaties and Agreements
 Art. 9. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties
 and international agreements in the name of the Republic.
 Peace treaties, treaties of commerce, treaties and agreements relating
 to international organizations and the settlement of international disputes,
 those that imply a commitment for the public finances, those that modify
 provisions of a legislative nature, and those that relate to the status of
 persons, may not be ratified except by a national law.
 Treaties and international agreements which involve the cession, ex-
 change or addition of territory may not be ratified or approved except
 by revision of Articles 1 (paragraph 1) and 4 of this Constitution and with
 the agreement of the populations concerned given by referendum.
 
 104
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 When a treaty or international agreement affects the interests of a
 province, the Government of the province concerned must be consulted
 before its conclusion.
 Art. 10. Treaties or international agreements duly ratified or approved
 shall have, upon their publication, an authority superior to that of
 the laws, subject in each case to its application by the other party.
 Art. 11. If the Constitutional Court, to whom the matter has been
 referred by one of the Chambers of Parliament, by the President of one
 of the Chambers, or by the President of a provincial Assembly, shall
 declare that an international undertaking contains a clause contrary
 to this Constitution, authorization to ratify or approve it may only be
 given after amendment of the Constitution.
 TITLE II
 FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
 Art. 12. In this Title, the word "law" unqualified by the word "nation-
 al" means either the national or the provincial laws.
 Art. 13. Respect for the rights consecrated in this Constitution shall
 be obligatory for the legislative, executive and judicial powers of the
 Republic and the provinces.
 Except as provided by this Constitution, the governmental authorities
 may take no measure incompatible with the principles set forth in this
 Title.
 When martial law has been proclaimed in accordance with the pro-
 visions of Article 104, no derogation may be made from the provisions
 of this article or of Articles 14, 15, 16 : 2 and 3, 17, 21 : 2 and 3, 23 : 2
 and 5, 24 : 1, 3, 4 and 5, 25, 31 to 37, 39 : 1 or 45.
 Art. 14. All Congolese are equal before the law and have the right to
 equal protection of the laws.
 Art. 15. In matters of education or access to public employment, no
 Congolese may be subject to discriminatory measures, whether by law
 or by executive authority, because of his religion, his tribal afiliation,
 his sex, his family, his place of birth or of residence.
 Art. 16. Everyone has the right to protection of life and the inviolability
 of his person. Noone may be subjected to torture or to inhuman or de-
 grading penalties or treatment. Noone may be put to death except in the
 cases and manner prescribed by law.
 Art. 17. Noone may be held in slavery or servitude nor in any analogous
 condition. Noone may be subject to force or obligatory labor except as
 provided by law.
 Art. 18. Individual freedom is guaranteed. Noone may be arrested or
 detained except in the cases and manner prescribed by law.
 
 105
 
 
 Art. 19. Any arrested person must be immediately, or at the latest
 within twenty-four hours, informed in a language which he understands
 of the reasons for his arrest and of any accusation against him.
 He may not be maintained in preventive detention except by order
 of the competent judge and in the cases and for a duration expressly
 provided by law. He has the right of appeal against the orders issued in
 connection with preventive detention.
 Art. 20. Any victim of arrest or detention under conditions contrary
 to the provisions of Articles 18 and 19 above, has the right to a just
 redress of the damage caused him or to an equitable indemnity.
 Art. 21. Everyone has the right to have his case heard fairly, within a
 reasonable time and by the competent judge. Everyone has the right to
 defend himself or to be defended by someone chosen by him. Noone may
 be removed against his will from the judge assigned to him by law. A
 national law shall set the conditions of indigence and the type of penalty
 which justifies legal assistance.
 Art. 22. Hearings in the courts and tribunals shall be public, except
 where publicity would endanger public order or good morals. In such
 cases, the tribunal shall order a hearing in camera by written judgment
 giving the reasons.
 Art. 23. Noone may be prosecuted except in the cases and forms and
 in the manner prescribed by law. Noone may be prosecuted for an action
 or omission that does not constitute an infraction of the law both at the
 time of commission and at the time of prosecution.
 Noone may be subject to a penalty heavier than that applicable at the
 time the act was committed. If the law in effect provides a lesser penalty
 than was prescribed at the time the act was committed by the law then
 in effect, the judge shall apply the lesser penalty.
 Art. 24. Any accused person shall be presumed innocent until his
 guilt has been established by a final verdict. All verdicts shall be written
 and shall contain the reasons therefor. Verdicts shall be read in open
 court. No penalty may be pronounced or inflicted except by law. A
 national law shall determine the reasons for justification, excuse or
 non-imputability.1 The right to appeal against any verdict is guaranteed
 to all in accordance with the law.
 Art. 25. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
 religion. There is no state religion in the Republic. Everyone who has
 reached his majority has the right to change his religion or his con-
 victions. Everyone has the right to manifest his religion or convictions,
 alone or in a group, in public or private, by ceremonies, teaching, practice,
 rites or the religious life, saving respect for the public order and for good
 morals.
 1 Original text: Une loi nationale ditermine les causes de ju8tification, d'excuse et
 de nonimputabilitg.
 
 Congo (Leopoldwill)
 
 106
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Art. 26. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right
 implies freedom to express opinions and sentiments by word, writing and
 pictures, saving respect for public order and good morals.
 Art. 27. Freedom of the press is guaranteed to all Congolese. No author-
 ization to publish shall be required nor shall censorship be instituted.
 The formalities for the announcement of publication shall be stipulated
 by law. Freedom of the press may be subject only to such legal restrictions
 as are necessary to safeguard the public order, public security and good
 morals, as well as the rights of others.
 When an author is known and resides in the Republic, there may be no
 prosecution of the publisher, printer or distributor.
 Art. 28. The right to broadcast by radio or by television shall be exercis-
 ed in accordance with the law. The Broadcasting and Television established
 by the governmental authorities are public services whose statute, em-
 bodied in a law, shall guarantee impartiality and respect for all con-
 victions in all broadcasts.
 Art. 29. All Congolese have the right to assemble peaceably without
 arms, and to found unions or other associations, or band together to
 promote their well-being and ensure the defense of their political, social,
 economic, religious or other interests.
 The right to strike is guaranteed. A law shall provide the procedure and
 conditions within which the functioning of public services or others of vital
 public interest shall be ensured, both in cases of strikes and of lockouts.
 Members of the armed forces, gendarmerie and police may not form
 nor join trade unions nor other associations with activities of a political
 character. Nor may they take part in any strike.
 Art. 30. Every Congolese has the right to create or to join a political
 party. No single party may be imposed upon the whole or any part of
 the territory of the Republic. Political parties shall take part in the
 expression of the suffrage. They shall be formed and shall exercise their
 activities freely. They must respect the principles of national sovereignty,
 democracy and the laws of the Republic.
 Art. 31. Everyone has the right to marry the person of his choice and to
 found a family. The family shall be organized in such a way as to ensure
 its unity and stability. It is placed under the special protection of the
 governmental authorities. The care and education of children constitutes
 a natural right and duty for the parents which they shall exercise under
 the surveillance and with the help of the governmental authorities.
 Art. 32. The governmental authorities shall protect youth against
 exploitation and moral abandonment. Youth organizations and their
 organs of co-ordination shall play an educational role. The governmental
 authorities must give them moral support.
 Art. 33. All Congolese have the right to an education. Parents have the
 right to choose the type of education for their children. Education is
 
 107
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 obligatory and free until the secondary level and until the age stipulated
 by law.
 Art. 34. Education is free, subject to the surveillance of the govern-
 mental authorities under the conditions established by a national law.
 Art. 35. The governmental authorities shall be obliged to establish
 within the reach of all Congolese a national education. This shall comprise
 educational establishments organized by the governmental authorities
 as well as approved establishments set up and organized by individuals.
 The establishment of schools by the governmental authorities, and their
 approval of private schools, shall take account of the general plan of
 education. Schools which form part of the national education shall
 be ruled by a statute drawn up by law. Their functioning shall be
 the responsibility of the governmental authorities. The public moneys
 assigned to the functioning of the national education shall be divided
 among the schools in accordance with the number of students.
 Art. 36. All Congolese have access to the establishments of national
 education without distinction of place, origin, religion, race or political
 or philosophic opinion. The establishments of national education, in
 collaboration with the authorities, shall ensure religious instruction to
 minor pupils whose parents so request and, to students who have reached
 their majority and so request, an education which accords with their
 religious convictions. A national law shall define the manner of applic-
 ation of this paragraph.
 Art. 37. Private schools, when a request is made by the persons con-
 cerned, shall be approved by the governmental authorities as forming
 part of the national education when their level of studies and the qualifi-
 cations of their personnel are not inferior to those of the schools established
 by the governmental authorities, and when they comply with the standards
 established by law in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution
 relating to educational matters.
 The governmental authorities shall subsidize the construction costs
 of private schools, on their request, when they show that they have
 fulfilled the conditions set by law.
 Art. 38. The exercise of art and scientific research are free, saving respect
 for public order and good morals.
 Art. 39. Everyone has the right to the inviolability of his domicile.
 The governmental authorities may infringe this freedom only in the cases
 and manner prescribed by law.
 Art. 40. No Congolese may be expelled from the territory of the
 Republic. All Congolese have the right freely to leave and return to the
 territory of the Republic. The exercise of this right may be limited only
 by law within the limits set by this Constitution for restrictions of indi-
 vidual freedom.
 Art. 41. All Congolese have the right to change their domicile and to
 
 108
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 establish themselves freely in any part of the Republic and to enjoy
 all the rights recognized by this Constitution. The exercise of this right
 may be limited only by a national law in the interests of public order or
 when the risks of epidemic or the prevention of general infractions of the
 law so require.
 Art. 42. Everyone has the right to secrecy in his correspondence and
 all other forms of communication. The governmental authorities may
 infringe this right only in the cases set by law.
 Art. 43. The right of property, whether acquired by customary or by
 written law, is guaranteed in accordance with national laws. Noone may
 be deprived of his possessions (movable or immovable) which have been
 acquired in any region of the Republic, except for reasons of general
 interest and under a national law which provides for payment of a fair
 prior indemnity and for the right of the person involved to bring any
 dispute before the courts to decide on the law and fix the amount of the
 indemnity.
 A national law may transfer to the Republic, to a province or to a
 territorial unit the property of certain private enterprises of vital national
 interest. In derogation of the above provisions, a national law shall regulate
 the juridical regime of the land concessions made before June 30, 1960.
 Art. 44. The exercise of trade is guaranteed to all Congolese throughout
 the territory of the Republic under the conditions set by a national law.
 There shall be free circulation of possessions throughout the area of the
 Republic.
 Art. 45. The Governmental authorities shall be responsible in civil
 law for the actions of their organs in the exercise of their mandate or their
 functions, without prejudice to their right of appeal. Anyone whose
 rights have been infringed by the governmental authorities has the right
 of appeal, which appeal shall fall within the competence of the ordinary
 courts except where this Constitution provides otherwise.
 Art. 46. Foreigners shall be granted the protection accorded by this
 Constitution to person and property save for the exceptions stipulated
 by law. They shall enjoy the rights reserved to Congolese within the limits
 established by a national law.
 TITLE III
 THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE LEGISLATIVE
 POWER BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC AND THE
 PROVINCES
 Art. 47. The distribution of the legislative power between the Republic
 and the provinces shall be established by this Constitution. There shall be
 
 109
 
 
 exclusive power of the Republic, concurrent power of the Republic and the
 provinces, and exclusive power of the provinces.
 Art. 48. Except as provided in other provisions of this Constitution,
 the following matters fall within the exclusive power of the Republic:
 (1) foreign affairs including diplomatic relations, the organization of
 foreign trade, treaties and international agreements;
 (2) nationality, status and the aliens' police;
 (3) extradition, immigration, emigration, delivery of passports and visas;
 (4) external security;
 (5) national defense;
 (6) the police of the capital;
 (7) the national public service;
 (8) the public finances of the Republic;
 (9) the establishment of income taxes, taxation       of societies and
 personal taxation, in accordance with article... .1;
 (10) the public debt of the Republic;
 (11) foreign loans for the needs of the Republic or the provinces;
 (12) internal loans for the needs of the Republic;
 (13) the issuance of currency and its purchasing power;
 (14) weights and measures;
 (15) customs and import and export duties;
 (16) the commercial code including insurance;
 (17) regulations relating to banks and banking operations;
 (18) exchange control;
 (19) literary, artistic and industrial property and trade marks;
 (20) the post office and telecommunications including the telephone,
 telegraph, radio broadcasting and television;
 (21) maritime and internal navigation, air lines, railroads, roads and
 other means of communication whether natural or artificial, which
 unite two or more provinces, or the territory of the Republic and a
 foreign territory, or which have been declared to be of national interest
 by a national law even though situated within the territory of a province;
 (22) the universities and other establishments of higher scientific,
 technical or professional education, set up or subsidized by the govern-
 mental authorities (whether the central or the provincial governments),
 declared by national law to be of general interest;
 (23) the establishment of standards of education applicable throughout
 the territory of the Republic;
 (24) the criminal code and the prison system;
 (25) the procedure to be followed before the courts and tribunals;
 (26) the aquisition of property for the needs of the Republic without
 prejudice to the provisions of Article 43;
 (27) the legal and medical professions;
 I Blank is the original text.
 
 110
 
 Congo (Leopoldvill)
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 (28) labor legislation, including the laws covering the relations between
 employers and workers, the security of workers, rules relating to social
 security and, in particular, rules relating to social insurance and
 forced unemployment;
 (29) economic legislation including laws relating to mines, minerals and
 mineral oil, industry, sources of energy, and the conservation of natural
 resources.
 (30) legislation relating to arts and crafts;
 (31) medical legislation and the art of healing, preventive medicine and
 in particular hygiene, public health and maternal and infant pro-
 tection, legislation concerning the profession of pharmacist, pharma-
 ceutic trade, immigration and transit, bilateral and international sanitary
 regulations, legislation concerning labor hygiene and the technical
 co-ordination of medical laboratories, the distribution of doctors;
 (32) the drawing up of agriculture and forestry programs of national
 interest and the co-ordination of those of provincial interest. The
 organizations for agricultural products and their dependent organs,
 as well as the engagement and distribution of directing personnel in
 accordance with the provisions of a general statute of officers of the
 public service; general legislation on agricultural and forestry systems,
 hunting and fishing, conservation of nature (fauna and flora), capture,
 breeding, food from animals, the veterinary art, the organization of the
 veterinary service and its collaboration with specialized international
 organizations;
 (33) the historic patrimony, public monuments, parks of national
 interest;
 (34) the meteorological services and the technical co-ordination of
 geodetic, cartographic and hydrographic services.
 Art. 49. Subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, the follow-
 ing matters shall fall within the concurrent power of the Republic and the
 provinces:
 (1) the putting into operation and safeguarding of the fundamental
 rights consecrated by this Constitution;
 (2) civil and customary rights;
 (3) statistics and the census;
 (4) internal security;
 (5) the administration of courts and tribunals, prisons;
 (6) cultural life;
 (7) the establishment of taxes, including excise and consumption
 taxes, with the exception of those taxes referred to in Article 48;
 (8) implementation of measures by the aliens' police;
 (9) scientific research and institutions of scientific research;
 (10) medical and philanthropic institutions; the engagement of direct-
 ing medical personnel.
 
 111
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Art. 50. Except as provided in other articles of this Constitution, all
 matters other than those enumerated in Articles 48 and 49 shall fall
 within the exclusive power of the provinces including, in particular, the
 following matters:
 (1) provincial political and administrative institutions;
 (2) the provincial public service;
 (3) the provincial electoral laws;
 (4) provincial public finances;
 (5) the provincial public debt;
 (6) internal loans for the needs of the provinces;
 (7) the granting of concessions and leases on the land, mines, minerals,
 mineral oils, water resources, forests and other public property;
 (8) public works of local interest;
 (9) the provincial police;
 (10) prisons;
 (11) education other than as provided in Article 49;
 (12) municipal institutions;
 (13) the acquisition of property for the needs of the provinces without
 prejudice to the provisions of Article 43;
 (14) the imposition of fines or prison sentences to ensure respect for
 provincial laws;
 (15) internal provincial communications;
 (16) local taxes and duties;
 (17) the placement of workers and fixing of minimum wages within the
 framework of national legislation; discipline for personnel inspection
 of work in accordance with the statute for officials of the public service
 and of national organizations, social security in conformity with the
 statute for such officials;
 (18) the engagement and placement of medical personnel in accordance
 with the statute for officials of the public service, the establishment of
 health programs and the campaign against endemo-epidemic sicknesses
 in accordance with national planning, organization of provincial
 health and preventive services, the application and control of national
 medical and pharmaceutical legislation as well as the organization of
 pharmaceutical services, curative medicine, philanthropic and mission-
 ary medical enterprises and medical laboratories;
 (19) the elaboration of agricultural and forestry programs and their exe-
 cution in accordance with the general standards of national planning.
 The engagement and placement of directing agricultural personnel in
 accordance with the provisions of the general statute of officers of the
 public service. The application of general agricultural, veterinary,
 forestry, breeding, hunting and fishing legislation, the conservation
 of nature and animal capture, without prejudice to the provisions of
 Article 48 : 32;
 
 112
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 (20) the historic patrimony, public monuments and parks other than
 those covered by Article 48 : 32;
 (21) the administrative control of geodetic, cartographic and hydro-
 graphic services.
 Art. 51. A provincial assembly may not legislate regarding matters
 which fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the national Parliament.
 Similarly, the national Parliament may not legislate on matters within
 the exclusive competence of a provincial assembly. However, the national
 Parliament may empower a provincial assembly to legislate on matters
 within the national jurisdiction. When Parliament terminates such a
 delegation of power to a provincial assembly, the provisions of the
 provincial laws promulgated in virtue thereof shall remain in effect in the
 province concerned pending the passing of a national law on the subject.
 A provincial assembly may, in the same way, empower the national
 Parliament to legislate on matters within the provincial jurisdiction, and
 laws so passed shall remain in effect in the province concerned pending
 the passing of a provincial law on the subject.
 Any provincial law on matters which fall within the concurrent juris-
 diction of the Republic and the provinces, shall be null and void insofar
 as it is incompatible with the legislation of the Republic.
 National laws shall prevail over provincial laws wherever the one is
 incompatible with the other.
 Art. 52. The provincial governments shall have their services implement
 all laws emanating from the national Parliament except insofar as the
 law in question provides otherwise.
 TITLE IV
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
 Art. 53. The principal national institutions are:
 (1) the President of the Republic;
 (2) the Government directed by a Prime Minister;
 (3) Parliament, composed of two chambers;
 (4) the Constitutional Court
 (5) the courts and tribunals.
 Section 1. The Central Executive Power
 The President
 Art. 54. The President of the Republic shall represent the Nation. He
 shall be the head of the central executive power. He shall determine and
 conduct the policy of the State. He shall establish the sphere of action of
 
 113
 
 
 the government, shall watch over its implementation, and inform Parlia-
 ment of developments.
 Art. 55. The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years.
 His mandate shall expire six months after the end of the legislature.
 Any Congolese citizen, at least forty years of age who fulfils the con-
 ditions laid down in Article 82 for eligibility to the Senate, may be elected
 President of the Republic.
 The President of the Republic may be reelected only for one consecutive
 term.
 Art. 56. The President of the Republic shall be elected by an electoral
 college composed of the members of Parliament and the delegates of the
 city of Leopoldville, voting in the capital, and of members of the provincial
 assemblies, voting in the capitals of their respective provinces.
 The city of Leopoldville shall, in accordance with a national electoral
 law, appoint electors equivalent in number to the provincial counsellors
 it would be entitled to were it organized as a province.
 The President of the Chamber of Deputies shall open the voting at least
 thirty and at most sixty days before the expiration of the mandate of the
 incumbent President of the Republic.
 Declarations of candidacy for the Presidency of the Republic shall be
 filed with the secretariat of the Chamber of Deputies ninety days at least
 and one hundred and twenty days at most before the expiration of the
 mandate of the incumbent President.
 The President shall be elected by absolute majority on the first two
 ballots and by relative majority on the third ballot. Only the two candi-
 dates having received the greatest number of votes on the first ballot
 shall be voted upon on the second ballot.
 A national organic law shall define the method of application of this
 article.
 Art. 57. Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall take
 the following oath before the President of the Constitutional Court:
 "I, (name), having been elected President of the Democratic Republic
 of the Congo, before the National Congress of governors of the provinces
 and members of the Constitutional Court, and in the presence of the
 Parliament of the Congo, swear to observe the Constitution and the
 laws of the Republic and to maintain the national independence and
 the integrity of the territory."
 Art. 58. If the Presidency is vacated by death, resignation or for any
 other reason, or impeded in its functioning as attested by the Consti-
 tutional Court to which the matter shall have been referred by the Prime
 Minister or his replacement appointed in accordance with paragraph 2
 of Article 71, the functions of the President of the Republic shall be
 temporarily exercised by the President of the Senate.
 If the vacancy or impediment is declared definitive by the Consti-
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 114
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 tutional Court, election of a new President of the Republic shall take place
 by convocation of the President of the Chamber of Deputies at least sixty
 and at most ninety days following attestation of definitive vacancy or
 impediment.
 If the Presidential term still to run is three years or more, the new
 President of the Republic shall be elected in accordance with the pro-
 visions of Article 56, paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6. If it is less than three
 years, the new President shall be elected by an electoral college composed
 of the members of the national Parliament, of five counselors from each
 provincial assembly, and of delegates appointed by the assembly of
 presidential electors of the city of Leopoldville from its midst. The electoral
 college shall meet in the capital.
 Election shall take place in accordance with the provisions of Article
 56 : 5. A national organic law shall define the manner of application of
 this paragraph.
 The President of the Republic elected in accordance with the provisions
 of this article shall exercise his functions until the expiration of the normal
 term of his predecessor. The provisions of Article 55 : 4 shall not apply
 to this term.
 Art. 59. The President of the Republic shall direct and control the foreign
 policy of the Republic. He shall accredit Ambassadors and Envoys
 Extraordinary to foreign powers; Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary
 of foreign powers shall be accredited to him.
 He shall ratify treaties and other international agreements in accordance
 with the provisions of Article 9.
 Art. 60. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the two
 national chambers either directly or by messages which he shall cause
 to be read and which shall not be followed by any debate.
 He shall address the Chambers, met together in Parliament, at least
 once a year on the policy of the central government.
 Art. 61. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the national
 laws according to the conditions laid down in this Constitution.
 He may address a message to Parliament before the expiration of the
 time limit for promulgation, requesting a second reading of a law or of
 some of its articles, except in the cases provided in Articles 102 and 103.
 This second reading may not be refused. A law, on second reading, except
 if it has been amended as requested by the President of the Republic,
 shall be adopted only if it is passed by each Chamber by a two thirds
 majority of its members. If it is so passed, the President of the Republic
 shall promulgate the law within the time limit set by Article 100 : 1.
 If the President of the Republic fails to promulgate a law within the
 time limits set by this Constitution, the President of the Chamber of
 Deputies shall do so.
 Art. 62. The President of the Republic shall ensure the implementation
 
 115
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 of the national laws and shall issue national regulations relating to the
 police and the internal organization of the central administration. He shall
 exercise this power by ordinance and by decree.
 He may, under the conditions set by Articles. . .,' issue decrees having
 the force of national laws.
 Decrees must always be deliberated by the Council of Ministers.
 Art. 63. The President of the Republic shall appoint the Prime Minister
 and the other members of the central government in accordance with the
 provisions of Article. . 1
 He shall invest the governors of the provinces with the authority to
 represent him.
 He shall be the supreme head of the armed forces. He shall appoint and
 revoke, in accordance with a national law, the commander in chief and
 the other officers of the armed forces.
 He shall appoint, in accordance with a national law, the counselors of
 the Constitutional Court, the counselors of the Supreme Court of Justice,
 the counselors of the Courts of Appeal and of the other courts, and the
 judges of all the tribunals.
 He shall appoint and revoke the high officials of the national adminis-
 tration in accordance with a national law.
 He shall administer the oath to the members of the central Government,
 to the governors of the provinces, the counselors of the Constitutional
 Court and of the Supreme Court of Justice, the commander in chief of the
 armed forces and the other high officers.
 Art. 64. The President of the Republic shall end the mandate of the
 Prime Minister and ministers of the central government upon their own
 resignation or at the proposal of the Prime Minister.
 He may, on his own initiative, terminate the functions of the Prime
 Minister or ministers of the central government when there is serious
 conflict between them and him.
 He shall be the final arbiter of conflicts between the Prime Minister
 and the other members of the government.
 Art. 65. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.
 He may not, however, pardon a member of the central or provincial
 governments who has been indicted in accordance with Article 78 and
 condemned by the Constitutional Court or by the Supreme Court of
 Justice, except with the agreement of the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 66. The President of the Republic shall confer the grades of the
 national orders in accordance with a national law, and the other decorations
 of the Republic.
 Art. 67. The President of the Republic shall have the right to issue
 the coinage and the paper money in execution of a national law.
 
 I Blank in original text.
 
 116
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 The Central Government
 Art. 68. The central Government shall be composed of the Prime
 Minister and of a maximum of fifteen other ministers.
 It may also include three secretaries of state, at the most, as assistants
 to the Prime Minister or a minister.
 Art. 69. The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President of the
 Republic. The other members of the central government shall be appointed
 by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the Prime Minister.
 The ministerial portfolios shall be assigned to the members of the
 central government by the President of the Republic on the proposal
 of the Prime Minister.
 Following their appointment, the members of the central government
 shall take the following oath before the President of the Republic:
 "I swear to observe the Constitution and laws of the Democratic Re-
 public of the Congo and loyally and faithfully to fulfil the duties entrusted
 to me."
 Art. 70. The President of the Republic shall obtain from the national
 Parliament, met in congress, approval of the appointment of the members
 of the government within thirty days of the constitution of the govern-
 mental team, if the Chambers are in session, or, if they are not in session,
 within thirty days of their meeting.
 If approval is refused, the government shall be considered to have
 resigned and the President of the Republic shall appoint a new prime
 minister and ministers, who must fulfil the same procedures for approval.
 Any new minister appointed by the President and approved by the
 congress in accordance with the provisions of the first paragraph of this
 article, must receive the approval of the Chamber of Deputies before
 taking up office.
 Without prejudice to other provisions of this Constitution, members
 of the government shall exercise their functions until termination of their
 mandate by the President of he Republic.
 Art. 71. The Prime Minister and his government shall have the national
 armed forces at their disposal under the conditions set by national law.
 Art. 72. The ministers shall be the heads of their departments. Under
 the direction of the Prime Minister, they shall apply in their departments
 the program evolved by the central Government and the decisions of the
 President of the Republic. Within these limits, they shall take all decisions
 concerning the operation of the public services connected with their
 departments.
 The secretaries of state shall exercise, under the authority of the
 minister to whom they are attached, the powers expressly assigned to
 them by the President of the Republic. They shall replace the ministers
 
 117
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 during their absence and shall countersign where necessary the acts of the
 President of the Republic.
 Art. 73. Except as elsewhere provided in this Constitution, members
 of the central Government shall be responsible only to the President of
 the Republic. They shall undertake by their countersignature, to execute
 his acts.
 Art. 74. Except as elsewhere provided in this Constitution, Parliament's
 means of control over the Government shall be interpellation, hearings
 by commissions, commissions of inquiry, warnings or censure.
 Art. 75. In case of permanent impediment of the Prime Minister in his
 functions, as attested by the President of the Republic, of his death, resig-
 nation or dismissal, the central Government shall be considered to have
 resigned. The central Government shall also be considered to have resigned
 at the expiration of the term of the President of the Republic.
 When the central Government has left office for whatever reason, it
 shall expedite current business until the formation of a new Government.
 Art. 76. When the President has ended the functions of the Prime
 Minister, lie shall immediately proceed to the selection of a new govern-
 mental team in accordance with the provisions of Articles 68 and 69.
 Provisions common to the President of the Republic
 and to the members of the Central Government
 Art. 77. The President of the Republic and the members of the central
 Government shall be criminally responsible for the acts accomplished in
 the exercise of their functions, in cases of high treason, intentional
 violation of this Constitution, embezzlement, bribery, corruption, and
 other cases provided by a national law.
 Any action contrary to the national Constitution whereby the President
 of the Republic or a member of the central Government infringes the
 national independence or the integrity of the national territory, or whereby
 he or they usurp the prerogatives of the Chambers, the Constitutional
 Court, the courts and tribunals, a provincial government or a provincial
 assembly, or whereby he prevents them or tries to prevent them from
 exercising the powers assigned to them by this Constitution, shall be
 considered a crime of high treason in the sense of the preceding paragraph.
 Any action contrary to the national Constitution whereby the Prime
 Minister or another member of the central Government usurps or attempts
 to usurp the prerogatives of the President of the Republic, or whereby
 he prevents or tries to prevent the latter from exercising the powers
 assigned to him by this Constitution, shall also be considered a crime of
 high treason.
 Art. 78. Neither the President of the Republic nor the members of the
 central Government may be prosecuted for the breaches of the law
 
 118
 
 
 mentioned in the first paragraph of Article 77, nor for any other breach
 of the criminal laws, unless they are indicted by one of the Chambers by an
 absolute majority of its members and by secret ballot. They shall be
 arraigned before the Constitutional Court in cases of high treason or
 intentional violation of his Constitution, and before the Supreme Court
 of Justice for all other matters.
 If they are condemned for high treason or for intentional violation of
 this Constitution, or if they are penalized, in accordance with the national
 electoral law by withdrawal of the right to be elected senator, the Consti-
 tutional Court must pronounce the verdict.
 A national law shall determine the penalties applicable to the crime
 of high treason and the manner of application of this article.
 The Conference of Governors of the Provinces
 Art. 79. The Conference of Governors of the provinces shall be constituted
 by the President of the Republic who shall preside, the Prime Minister
 and the governors of the provinces. Without prejudice to the other pro-
 visions of this Constitution, the Conference shall have a consultative role.
 It shall meet at least once a year upon convocation by its president.
 The purpose of the Conference of Governors of the Provinces shall be to
 reinforce the unity of the Republic and to facilitate the co-ordination of
 provincial policy.
 A national organic law shall stipulate the manner of application of
 this article.
 Section 2. The national legislative power
 The composition and functioning of Parliament
 Art. 80. The national Parliament shall be constituted by the Chamber
 of Deputies and the Senate.
 Deputies shall represent the nation.
 Senators who are elected by the provincial assemblies shall represent
 their respective provinces. Senators who are elected by the city of Leopold-
 ville shall represent the city.
 Art. 81. Deputies shall be elected by direct, secret, universal suffrage,
 one deputy per 100,000 inhabitants. Any fraction of 50,000 or more
 inhabitants shall have the right to an additional deputy.
 The city of Leopoldville and each of the provinces shall be represented
 by six senators. The senators representing the provinces shall be elected
 by the provincial assemblies. One of the six senators from each province
 shall be a customary chief or a notable elected in that capacity.
 The senators of the city of Leopoldville shall be elected by universal,
 direct and secret suffrage.
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 119
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Former Presidents of the Republic shall, furthermore, be life members
 of the Senate.
 Art. 82. The Chambers shall be elected for five years. The election of
 new Chambers shall take place at least thirty and at most sixty days
 before the end of the term of the legislature.
 Voters must be Congolese, who have completed 18 years and have none
 of the disqualifications provided by the national electoral law.
 Candidates for the Chamber of Deputies, must be Congolese, 25 years
 of age and not disqualified by any provision of the national electoral law.
 Candidates for the Senate must be Congolese, 80 years of age, and not
 disqualified by any provision of the national electoral law.
 The national electoral law shall establish the manner of the elections
 and the conditions of appointment of persons to replace members of
 either of the Chambers whose seats have fallen vacant until elections for a
 new Parliament.
 The term "Congolese" shall include both men and women.
 Only men, however, may vote in the first elections following the entry
 into force of this Constitution.
 Art. 83. Each Chamber shall verify the credentials of its members.
 Art. 84. The mandate of a member of Parliament shall be terminated
 by death, resignation, permanent incapacity, absence without reason
 or authorization from more than one quarter of the meetings of an ordinary
 session, or when he is disqualified by any of the provisions of the national
 electoral law.
 Art. 85. Each Chamber shall adopt its rules of procedure. Before being
 put into force, the rules of procedure of the Chambers shall be communi-
 cated by the President of the Chamber concerned to the Constitutional
 Court which shall rule on its conformity to this Constitution. Any pro-
 visions declared to be imcompatible with this Constitution shall not be
 put into effect.
 Any later modification of the rules of procedure shall follow the same
 procedure.
 Each Chamber shall draw up, within its rules of procedure, the adminis-
 trative organization of its services.
 The administrative services of each Chamber shall fall under the auth-
 ority of a secretary general, appointed in accordance with the rules
 of the Statute for Parliamentary officers. The secretary general shall
 administer the funds of the Assembly. He shall keep the archives of the
 Chamber.
 A national laiv shall determine the statute of Parliamentary officials, in
 accordance with the provisions of Article 167.
 Art. 86. The Chambers shall meet in ordinary session twice a year.
 The first session shall open on the first Monday in March and shall end
 on the first Monday of June, unless the agenda has been covered earlier.
 
 120
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 The second session shall open on the first Monday of September and shall
 end on the first Monday of December unless the agenda has been covered
 earlier.
 The Chambers shall be convoked in extraordinary session by the Presi-
 dent of the Republic on his own initiative or at the request of one fourth
 of the members of one of the Chambers.
 Each Chamber may be convoked in extraordinary session by its Presi-
 dent at the request of one third of its members. In such a case the other
 Chamber shall automatically meet also.
 The act of convocation in the above cases shall specify the agenda of
 the session.
 The Chambers shall meet in extraordinary session, upon convocation
 by the President of the Republic, within thirty days following the end
 of the legislature in order to constitute their secretariat.
 The President of the Republic shall declare the closure of ordinary
 sessions, on the proposal of the secretariats, as well as of extraordinary
 sessions, as soon as the agenda for which they met has been exhausted.
 Art. 87. Meetings of the Chambers shall be public. Each Chamber may
 decide to sit in secret committee. It shall also decide whether such sessions
 shall resume in public for the same subject.
 The President shall keep order in the Assembly. He may, after warning,
 expel immediately any member of the public who disturbs the order
 or gives signs of approval or disapproval. Any person refusing to
 obey an expulsion order shall be subject to the penalty provided by national
 law.
 An in extenso report of the debates shall be published in accordance
 with national law.
 Art. 88. Each year at the March ordinary session, the Chambers shall
 elect their secretariats, composed of a president, a vice-president and two
 secretaries.
 Art. 89. When the Chambers meet in national congress, they shall use
 the secretariat of the Chamber of Deputies; the President shall be al-
 ternately the President of the Senate and the President of the Chamber
 of Deputies.
 Art. 90. In addition to the permanent commissions, the two chambers
 shall constitute one or more mixed permanent parliamentary commissions
 composed of an equal number of members elected from each chamber.
 The mixed permanent commissions shall meet in national congress
 only in the cases stipulated in this Constitution.
 The Chambers shall meet in national congress to conciliate differing
 points of view on a subject in order to reach a valid decision.
 Art. 91. Members of Parliament shall exercise their mandate inde-
 pendently. Binding instructions on deputies shall be null and void. The
 vote of deputies shall be personal.
 
 121
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Members of Parliament may not take part in debates on matters in
 which they have a personal interest.
 Art. 92. Members of the central Government shall have the right and,
 where necessary, the obligation, to attend sessions of the Chambers.
 They must be heard whenever they request. They may be assisted by
 government commissioners. They may not vote.
 Art. 93. A quorum shall consist of one third of the members of each
 chamber, or of Parliament when it is meeting in congress. However, and
 except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, neither the chambers
 nor Parliament meeting in Congress may decide matters except by an
 absolute majority of the members.
 Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all resolutions
 and decisions shall be passed by an absolute majority. In case of a tie,
 the matter shall be rejected.
 Art. 94. Voting shall be by roll call or by rising or remaining seated.
 On the whole text of a law voting shall by be roll call. Voting may also
 take place by a technical system providing the same guarantees.
 Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, each Chamber.may
 decide that a particular resolution shall be passed by secret ballot.
 Elections shall always take place by secret ballot.
 Art. 95. French shall be the official language of Parliament. Each
 chamber may, however, decide to use other working languages.
 The Elaboration of Laws
 Art. 96. The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate shall collectively
 exercise the national legislative power.
 Art. 97. The President of the Republic and members of Parliament
 alike shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 National bills shall first be submitted to the Council of Legislation for
 an opinion. The Council shall submit government bills to the central
 Government and parliamentary bills to the secretariat of the appropriate
 chamber together with a report. Bills shall then be successively examined
 by each chamber in order to arrive at an identical text.
 Members of the central Government shall have the right of amendment.
 Bills shall first be examined by the appropriate commission which
 shall present them to the assembly with a report. They shall then be
 discussed by the assembly article by article, and be finally adopted by a
 vote covering all the articles.
 Art. 98. Finance bills shall be filed with the secretariats of the chambers
 at the September session at the latest, and shall be passed by Parliament.
 Their procedure shall be the same as that described in Article 97.
 Any amendment to the finance bill involving an increase in expenditure
 shall also provide the ways and means to meet this expenditure. Any
 
 122
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 amendment involving a decrease in revenue such as to unbalance the
 budget shall also provide for a corresponding decrease in expenses or new
 revenues.
 If Parliament fails to reach a decision on a Government bill before
 the beginning of the financial year, the provisions of the bill may be put
 into effect by a decree-law.
 If the finance bill is not filed in time to be promulgated before the
 beginning of the financial year, the President of the Republic shall ask
 Parliament to open the necessary provisional credits. If Parliament fails
 to decide within fifteen days to open the credits, the provisions concerning
 them may be put into effect by a decree law.
 If the government fails to file the finance bill by the opening of the
 March session, it shall be considered to have resigned.
 If Parliament fails to pass the finance bill by the closure of the March
 session, and the Government has filed the bill at least sixty days in
 advance, the President of the Republic shall put its provisions into effect
 by a decree law.
 Art. 99. If the President of the Republic declares that a bill is urgent,
 and without prejudice to the provisions of Article 97, paragraphs 1 and 2,
 the relevant commission of each chamber shall give it priority, in ac-
 cordance with a procedure to be stipulated by a national organic law. The
 same law shall stipulate how the work of the commissions shall be made
 public and the time limit within which the chamber must decide on urgent
 bills. If the chamber does not reach a decision within the stipulated time
 limit, the commission's version shall be considered to have been adopted.
 The ordinary procedure for bills must be applied to all bills of amend-
 ment of this Constitution or of the organic laws, the electoral law, or
 relating to the delegation of powers provided in Article 102.
 Art. 100. Except as provided in Article 61, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this
 Constitution, national laws shall be promulgated by the President of the
 Republic within ten days of their transmission to the central Government
 by the President of the Chamber where they have been finally adopted.
 National laws shall be stamped with the seal of the Republic and
 published in the official journal of the Republic immediately after their
 promulgation. Except as otherwise provided in the law in question, they
 must enter into force thirty days following their publication in the
 official journal.
 Art. 101. The national electoral law and the other national laws which
 this Constitution characterizes as organic laws, shall be adopted and
 modified by an absolute majority of the members of each chamber.
 They shall be submitted, before promulgation, to the Constitutional
 Court which shall rule on their conformity to this Constitution within one
 month.
 Art. 102. The Chambers, either on their own initiative or at the reques
 
 123
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 of the President of the Republic, may delegate by law to the latter the
 exercise of the national legislative power in respect of specified matters
 and for a fixed period of time.
 The President of the Republic shall exercise such power by decree-laws
 taken in the Council of Ministers.
 The Chambers may request the central Government to inform their
 secretariats within a specified time limit of the decree-laws thus taken.
 If a decree-law is rejected by either Chamber within the time limit fixed
 in the enabling act mentioned in the first paragraph above, the President
 of the Republic may not promulgate it.
 Decree-laws shall be published in the same way as national laws and
 shall have the same force.
 The Chambers may at any time during the period of delegation of
 powers referred to above, modify or withdraw, by law, the powers conferred
 on the President of the Republic.
 Art. 103. In all special emergency cases other than those provided in
 Article 104, the President of the Republic may issue decrees having the
 force of law.
 He shall file them within twenty four hours of their signature to the
 secretariats of the chambers for approval by law, and with the Consti-
 tutional Court which shall verify their conformity with this Constitution.
 When the chambers are not in session, the President of the Republic
 shall convene them in extraordinary session. Decree-laws which have not
 been approved within a time limit of sixty days from their publication
 shall cease of effect.
 Art. 104. In war time or when the Republic is threatened by danger
 from abroad, or when the regular functioning of its institutions or those
 of a province is interrupted, the President of the Republic shall proclaim
 martial law. He shall take the measures necessary to meet the danger.
 The President of the Republic shall file the declaration of martial law
 as well as each measure that normally is within the domain of law or
 derogates from the provisions of this Constitution with the secretariats
 of the Chambers immediately after signature, in order that Parliament may
 give its approval. If the chambers are not in session he shall convene
 them for this purpose.
 The measures shall also be submitted to the Constitutional Court follow-
 ing their signature for an opinion on their conformity with this Consti-
 tution.
 If the secretariat of either chamber so requests, the Constitutional
 Court shall examine the measures before the chambers meet to ascertain
 whether they contain an abuse of power. It shall declare null and void any
 measure containing an abuse of power. The proclamation of martial
 law and the emergency measures which fall within the domain of law shall
 automatically cease of effect if the chambers reject them or do not approve
 
 124
 
 
 them within a time limit of sixty days from filing with the secretariats
 of the chambers or from the date of proclamation of martial law if the
 chambers are in recess. Measures which derogate from this Constitution
 must be approved by a two-thirds majority of each chamber and the time
 limit of sixty days mentioned above shall be in this case fifteen days.
 Martial law may be proclaimed over all or part of the territority of the
 Republic for a maximum period of six months, It may be prolonged for
 successive periods of three months under the same conditions.
 The chambers may put an end to martial law at any time by a law which
 shall be promulgated by the President of the Republic within the time
 limit set in the law and without the possibility of a second reading.
 Art. 105. Only written petitions may be presented to the chambers.
 Each chamber shall have the right to send the petitions it receives to
 members of the central Government. The members of the central Govern-
 ment shall be obliged to give explanations in relation to the matters raised
 in the petitions whenever one of the chambers so requires.
 Special Provisions
 Art. 106. No member of Parliament may be prosecuted, arrested, de-
 tained or tried because of opinions or votes expressed by him in the exer-
 cise of his functions.
 No member of Parliament, during sessions, may be prosecuted or
 arrested without the authorization of the Chamber to which he belongs,
 except in flagrante delicto.
 The detention or prosecution of members of Parliament shall be suspend-
 ed if the chamber to which he belongs so requests for a duration which
 shall not exceed that of the session.
 When Parliament is not in session, no member may be arrested without
 the authorization of the secretariat of the chamber to which he belongs,
 except in flagrante delicto, for an attempt on someone's life or bodily
 integrity, for corruption, authorized prosecution or final conviction.
 TITLE V
 THE PROVINCIAL INSTITUTIONS
 Section I. General Provisions
 Art. 107. The provinces shall be subdivided into administrative entities
 called districts or cities, communes and tribal districts (chefferies).
 The principal organs of the provinces are 1) the provincial government
 and 2) the provincial assembly.
 Art. 108. The provinces and their subordinate authorities shall respect
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 125
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 this Constitution and the measures taken by the central government in
 accordance with the Constitution.
 Except as provided elsewhere in this Constitution, each province shall
 organize its own institutions and issue its own legislation.
 When martial law has been proclaimed in accordance with article
 104, or at the request of the provincial assembly, the President of the
 Republic by decree shall appoint a committee presided over by a high
 commissioner of the Republic to rule the province.
 Section II. Provincial Government
 Art. 109. The provincial government shall consist of the Governor of
 the province and the members whose number, established by provincial
 law may not exceed 6.
 Any person appointed to be Governor or member of the provincial
 government shall fulfil the general conditions for eligibility to a provincial
 assembly laid down in the electoral law.
 Art. 110. The provincial Governor shall be the head of the provincial
 executive: he shall represent the President of the Republic within the
 province.
 Art. 111. The provincial Governor shall be elected by the provincial
 assembly either from amongst its members or from the outside, by a three-
 fourths majority of its members on the two first ballots. If there is a third
 ballot, it shall relate only to the two candidates who have received the
 greatest number of votes from the second ballot and shall be decided
 by a two-thirds majority of the assembly.
 Voting shall begin upon the call of the President of the provincial
 assembly at least eight days and at most thirty days from the setting up
 of the assembly's secretariat.
 After election, the Governor shall automatically be invested with the
 powers of the respresentative of the Head of State in the province, by the
 President of the Republic.
 Before taking office he shall take the following oath before the President
 of the Republic: "I swear to observe the constitution of the province
 and the Congo as well as national and provincial laws passed in accordance
 with the Constitution and loyally to fulfil the functions confided to me."
 Art. 112. The provincial Governor shall direct the policy of the province
 in collaboration with the governmental team over which he shall preside.
 He shall co-ordinate and control the activities of other members of the
 government and assign their powers. He shall settle any conflicts of powers
 between members of the Government.
 He shall draw up a budget bill each year which he shall submit to
 the assembly. He shall promulgate and publish the provincial laws. He
 shall insure the execution of the provincial laws and issue provincial
 
 126
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 police regulations as well as those relating to the internal organization
 of the provincial administration. He shall exercise this power by means
 of orders. He shall have control over the provincial services under the
 conditions set by provincial law.
 In cases of emergency duly attested, he shall issue in the form of regu-
 lations the legislative measures necessary to implement a law, a decree
 or a decree-law or an ordinance, if the assembly has failed to respond
 to two successive appeals.
 He shall ensure the execution of national legislative and regulatory
 acts assigned to him by the central Government. He shall direct the
 national administrative services in the province and co-ordinate relations
 between central and provincial institutions.
 Art. 113. The Governor of the province may defend in court any
 lawsuits undertaken against the province. He may without prior deliber-
 ation by the assembly, undertake lawsuits respecting movable property
 and conservation and possessory actions.
 The Governor of the province shall choose the lawyers responsible
 for representing him in the courts. Provincial actions either as plaintif
 or defendant shall be exercised by the provincial Governor.
 Art. 114. The normal term of the provincial Governor shall be the same
 as that of the legislator. His term shall end by death, resignation or
 dismissal, or at the beginning of each new legislature, from the time
 that the assembly secretariat has been set up. Resignation shall not be
 valid unless accepted by the provincial assembly. Dismissal shall be
 pronounced by the President of the Republic in accordance with Articles
 116 and 117 of this Constitution.
 In case the Governor is impeded in his functioning, his duties shall
 temporarily be exercised by a member of the government appointed by
 the Governor or by the cabinet council.
 In case of vacancy in the office of Governor for whatever reason duly
 attested by the Constitutional Court to whom the matter shall be referred
 by the President of the Republic, by the President of the provincial assem-
 bly or by the provincial government, a new Governor shall be elected by
 the provincial assembly and inaugurated by the President of the Republic
 in accordance with Article 111 paragraphs 1, 3 and 4. Balloting shall be
 opened by the President of the provincial assembly at the latest thirty
 days after the expiration of the normal term of the outgoing Governor.
 Candidacies shall be filed with the secretariat of the assembly at the latest
 on the eve of the day of the voting.
 Art. 115. The members of the provincial government shall be appointed
 by the provincial Governor from among the members of the provincial
 assembly or from outside. They shall take office after approval of their
 appointment by the provincial assembly and after taking the oath before
 the Governor.
 
 127
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 If the provincial assembly refuses approval of the appointment of
 members nominated by the Governor the latter must appoint a new
 governmental team and present it to the assembly.
 The functions of member of the provincial government shall come to
 an end by death, resignation accepted by the Governor, or by dismissal
 pronounced in accordance with the articles, or at the end of the term of
 the Governor.
 When the term of the Governor and the members of his government
 is ending they shall expedite current business until the the new govern-
 ment has taken office in accordance with Article 111.
 Art. 116. When the provincial Governor or another member of the
 provincial government commits an action contrary to the national or pro-
 vincial constitution, whereby he usurps or attempts to usurp the functions
 of the President of the Republic, of the central Government, of the Cham-
 bers, of the Constitution or of the courts and tribunals, or whereby he
 impedes or attempts to impede them from exercising the powers conferred
 upon them by this Constitution or by a provincial constitution, he shall
 be arraigned before the Constitutional Court.
 Either the President of the Republic, or the provincial assembly by an
 absolute majority and secret vote, or the provincial governor when it
 is a question of other members of the provincial government may refer
 the matter to the court.
 If the provincial Governor is found guilty by the Constitutional Court,
 he shall be dismissed by the President of the Republic. Other members
 of a provincial government shall be dismissed by the Governor.
 Art. 117. Except as provided in the preceding article, the provincial
 Governor and members of the provincial government may not be subject
 to criminal prosecution except if they have been indicted by the President
 of the Republic or by the provincial assembly by an absolute majority
 and secret vote. A national law shall fix the penalties applicable to the
 infringements referred to in Article 116, paragraph 1, and the manner of
 application of this article.
 They shall be arraigned before the Supreme Court of Justice.
 If the provincial Governor is found guilty by the Supreme Court
 of Justice he shall be dismissed by the President of the Republic. Other
 members of the provincial government found guilty shall be dismissed
 by the Governor.
 Art. 118. The provincial assembly shall be constituted by:
 (1) Provincial counselors elected by universal direct and secret suffrage;
 (2) Provincial counselors co-opted by the elected counselors from
 among notables and customary chiefs;
 (3) The number of chiefs and notables co-opted shall be equal to one
 fifth of the assembly but shall not be less than three;
 (4) The assembly shall contain one elected representative for each
 
 128
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 25.000 inhabitants. Any fraction of the inhabitants equal to or more
 than 12.500. shall have the right to an additional elected representative.
 There may not be less than 15 members of an assembly.
 Art. 119. The assembly's term of office shall be 5 years.
 Elections of provincial counselors shall take place at least 30 and at
 most 60 days before the end of the legislature. Voters must fulfil con-
 ditions provided in Article 82, paragraph 3, and have their principal
 residence in the province for at least a year.
 Candidates to the provincial assembly must fulfil the conditions provid-
 ed in Article 82, paragraph 4 for eligibility to the chamber of deputies.
 The manner of electing and co-opting provincial counselors shall be
 stipulated in a provincial law in accordance with the national electoral
 law. This law shall also stipulate the conditions for electing or co-opting
 replacements for provincial counselors whose seats have fallen vacant
 until general renewal of the assembly.
 Art. 120. Provincial counselors shall represent the province and not
 the constituency nor any other administrative unit of which they may
 be members.
 Art. 121. The provincial assembly shall meet by right in two ordinary
 sessions a year, on the first Mondays of April and October. The duration
 of each ordinary session shall be at least 15 and at most 60 days.
 The closure or ordinary sessions shall be pronounced at the proposal
 of the President of the assembly by the Governor of the province.
 The assembly shall elect each year at the regular April session its
 secretariat composed of a President, a Vice-President and two secretaries.
 The first session of the legislature shall be convened by the incumbent
 Governor within fifteen days of the proclamation of the election results.
 The assembly shall verify the credentials of its members before electing
 the secretariat.
 The assembly shall meet in extraordinary sessions upon the convocation
 of the Governor of the province or of the President of the assembly to
 consider a fixed agenda. The President of the assembly must convene the
 assembly if requested to do so by one fifth of the provincial counselors.
 The extraordinary session shall be closed by order of the Governor as soon
 as its agenda is exhausted.
 Any meeting of the assembly other than in ordinary or extraordinary
 session shall be null and void.
 Art. 122. The provincial assembly shall meet in the capital of the pro-
 vince unless the Governor, for some extraordinary reason, has authorized
 it to sit in an other place in the province.
 Art. 123. At the first session of the legislature, the assembly, after having
 completed the operations provided in Article 121, paragraph 3, shall elect
 the senators to represent the province in the Senate. Their election shall
 conform to the national electoral law.
 
 129
 
 
 Art. 124. When the assembly is required by this Constitution to approve
 an action of the central Government, or when its requests the President
 of the Republic to take the measures provided in Articles 4 and 108, it
 shall rule by an absolute majority of its members.
 Art. 125. Within the limitations on autonomy recognized to the
 provinces by this Constitution, the provincial constitution and laws
 shall be passed by the provincial assembly. Both the Governor of the
 province and the members of the assembly shall have the right to initiate
 amendment of the provincial constitution and laws.
 Art. 126. The assembly shall give its advice on any questions submitted
 to it by the President of the Republic and by the Prime Minister or by
 either Chamber.
 Art. 127. The President of the assembly shall insure the authenticity
 of the acts of the assembly by his signature.
 Art. 128. The provisions of Articles 86, 87, 88, 90, 94, 97, 98, 99 and 100
 shall be applicable mutatis mutandis to the provincial assemblies and
 their members.
 Art. 129. A national organic law shall establish the procedures for the
 elections of the provisional and definitive secretariats of the provincial
 assemblies, co-option of notables and chiefs, election of senators and
 verification of credentials.
 Section IV. Relations between the Governor and the
 Provincial Assembly
 Art. 130. The provisions of Articles 60, 74 and 92 shall be applicable
 mutatis mutandis to the provincial Governor and members of the pro-
 vincial government in their relations with the provincial assembly.
 TITLE VI
 THE JUDICIAL POWER
 Section I. General provisions
 Art. 131. The judicial power shall be independent of the legislative and
 executive powers. Justice shall be rendered over the territory of the
 Republic in the name of the people.
 Art. 132. The entire judicial power shall devolve upon the courts and
 tribunals. The courts and tribunals may be instituted only by national
 law. No commission nor extraordinary tribunal by whatever name may
 be created. The judicial power shall be exercised by the courts and
 tribunals which shall apply the laws and customs insofar as the latter
 conform to the laws, public order and good morals. The courts and tri-
 
 130
 
 Congo (Leopoldwille)
 
 
 Congo (LeopoldviUe)
 
 bunals shall apply regulatory acts only insofar as they conform to the laws.
 Art. 133. No organs of the legislative and executive powers may
 exercise the judicial function.
 In peace time, military tribunals shall deal only with infringements of
 the law by members of the Armed Forces.
 The President of the Republic in cases of emergency and with the
 agreement with the Attorney General, may suspend in any part of the
 Republic and for a fixed time any repressive action of the courts and
 tribunals, and may substitute therefore military jurisdictions.
 Where military jurisdictions have been substituted for those of the
 courts and tribunals, the rights of defense and appeal may not be
 supressed.
 Art. 134. The ordinances of the courts and tribunals shall be executed
 in the name of the President of the Republic.
 Section IL Jurisdictions
 Art. 135. There shall be the following jurisdictions within the judicial
 power,
 - the Supreme Court of Justice;
 - the courts of appeal;
 - the military courts;
 - other tribunals instituted by national law.
 The organization, competence and procedure of the courts and tribunals
 shall be established by national law.
 The Supreme Court of Justwe:
 Art. 136. The Supreme Court of Justice shall be constituted by two
 sections:
 - the juridical section;
 - the administrative section.
 The juridical section shall:
 (1) consider appeals against final decisions of the courts of appeals
 and the tribunals; in these cases it shall not judge of the substance
 of the matter.
 (2) try the President of the Republic, members of the central
 government, governors of the provinces and members of the pro-
 vincial government, according to the provisions of this Constitution.
 The administrative section shall, by order, rule in the last resort on
 appeals for annulment on the grounds either of substantial formal irregu-
 larities or of non-compliance with prescribed procedures; on appeals against
 excess, abuse or misuse of authority, or on requests for indemnities
 against the acts and regulations of the administrative authorities.
 Art. 137. The competence of the Supreme Court shall extend over the
 
 131
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 whole territory of the Republic. Decisions of the Supreme Court shall
 be binding on all internal courts and tribunals and may not be appealed
 to any jurisdiction whatsoever.
 Courts of Appeal and Tribunals
 Art. 138. The status of magistrates shall be regulated by national law.
 Their appointment shall take place in accordance with the national law.
 Judges may not be removed from office. They may not be transferred
 except to a new post and with their consent. They shall have life tenure.
 Prosecuting magistrates shall be appointed and dismissed by the President
 of the Republic.
 Art. 139. The courts of appeal shall be composed of the juridical section
 and the administrative section.
 Art. 140. No judge may accept from the central or provincial govern-
 ments any salaried function unless he exercises it without remuneration,
 nor may he be a member of the national parliament nor of a provincial
 assembly. Other offices incompatible with judgeship shall be determined
 by national law.
 Section IV. The High Council of the Judiciary
 Art. 141. The High Council of the Judiciary shall be composed of:
 (1) A member appointed by the Constitutional Court from among
 its members or from among other judges;
 (2) The first President of the Supreme Court of Justice and one other
 member;
 (3) Three judges elected by delegates of the courts of appeal;
 (4) Seven judges elected by delegates of the other courts.
 A national law shall determine the number of delegates of the courts
 of appeal and of the other courts and the manner of their election.
 The High Council shall be presided over by the President of the Republic.
 Its Vice President shall be automatically the Minister of Justice. He may
 substitute for the President of the Republic.
 The High Council of the Judiciary, under conditions established by
 national organic law, shall give its opinion on proposals by the governors
 of the provinces respecting the appointments of judges. It shall be con-
 sulted on all questions of pardon in accordance with the stipulations of a
 national organic law.
 The High Council of the Judiciary shall sit as a disciplinary council
 for judges. It shall then be presided over by the first president of the
 Supreme Court of Justice.
 
 132
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 TITLE VII
 AUXILIARY ORGANS
 Section I. The National Economic and Social Council
 Art. 142. A consultative assembly entitled the National Economic
 and Social Council shall be set up to assist the governmental authorities.
 The Council shall be composed of representatives of the principal
 economic and social activities of the country and the representatives of
 the provincial councils enumerated in paragraph 4 below.
 It shall be divided into sections charged with the study of the principal
 problems connected with the different economic and social activities.
 At the provincial level there shall be a provincial economic and social
 council, the number of whose sections shall be determined by a provincial
 law.
 The education section shall include sub-sections to specialize in the
 problems connected with the different systems of education. It shall
 include delegates from the Ministry of National Education, representatives
 of each branch of national and of private education, representatives of a
 teaching body and of the parents of students, in all the systems of national
 education.
 The education section shall give advice and make proposals concerning
 the school programs, teaching methods, school planning and co-ordination,
 and on the measures necessary to insure respect for the provisions of
 Articles 34, 35, 36 and 37.
 The National Economic and Social Council and the provincial councils
 may call on help of persons chosen for their particular competence in the
 field.
 Art. 143. The National Economic and Social Council and the provincial
 councils must be consulted by the central government, by the provincial
 governments, by one of the chambers, or by the provincial assemblies,
 on all economic and social problems of concern to the Republic or to the
 provinces. It shall in particular give its advice on any plan or any bill of an
 economic and social character concerning a province or the whole Republic,
 submitted by the government before transmission to the secretariats of
 the chambers or of the provincial assemblies.
 Any bill not submitted to the National Economic and Social Council
 shall be null and void. A national law shall determine the time limits
 within which the national and provincial councils shall give their opinions.
 If the councils do not comply with these time limits the governmental
 authorities may act without waiting for their opinion.
 The National Economic and Social Council and the provincial councils
 
 133
 
 
 may, on their own initiative call the government's attention to reforms
 which seem to them necessary to promote the economic and social develop-
 ment of the country.
 They may entrust one of their members with the task of explaining
 before the chambers of the provincial assemblies the Council's advice on a
 bill submitted to it. A national law shall provide the composition and
 procedure of the National Economic and Social Council and the provincial
 councils.
 Art. 144. The National Economic and Social Council and the provincial
 councils may, on their own initiative call the government's attention to
 reforms which seem to them necessary to promote the economic and social
 development of the country.
 The National Economic and.Social Council and the provincial councils
 shall appoint their President, Vice-President and two secretaries from
 among their members at the beginning of each session.
 Art. 145. The term of office of members of the National Economic
 and Social Council and of the provincial councils shall be six years. They
 shall enjoy the same immunities as those granted to members of parliament
 during sessions.
 Section II. Special Parity Commission to establish Salaries
 Art. 146. A Special Parity Commission shall establish the maximum
 amount for emoluments of members of parliament, of provincial assem-
 blies, of the central Government and of the provincial governments; These
 emoluments shall be charged to the government budget. The Commission
 shall rule by a two-thirds majority of its members.
 The Commission shall be composed, one half by representatives of the
 national and provincial governmental authorities and the other half by
 delegates appointed by the Economic and Social Council from among its
 members.
 A national organic law shall regulate the organization and procedure
 of the Commission.
 Section III. The Legislative Council
 Art. 147. The Legislative Council shall be consultative organ dependent
 on the governor's conference.
 Its members shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on
 proposals by the Governor's Conference.
 The Council shall include sections established in the capital and in the
 provincial capitals. A national organic law shall regulate the organization
 and procedure of the Council and the status of its members.
 Art. 148. The President of the Republic and the governor of the pro-
 
 134
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 vinces, the president of each chamber and of each provincial assembly
 shall submit to the Council for advice all bills or other legislative acts, or
 proposed decrees, ordinances, and orders.
 Members of the central government and of the provincial government
 may submit to the Council for its advice any proposed action. They may
 also ask the Legislative Council to draft the text of the bill or of a regu-
 lation.
 Except as provided in the following paragraph any bill or any proposed
 decree, ordinance or order not submitted to the Council shall be null and
 void.
 A national law shall establish the time limit within which the Council
 must give its advice. If this time limit is not complied with, the govern-
 mental authorities may act without waiting for the Council's advice.
 TITLE VIII
 PUBLIC FINANCES
 Art. 149. The monetary unit of the Republic shall be the franc. It
 shall be accepted throughout the territory of the Republic and its weight
 in gold shall be fixed by national law.
 Any bill modifying the value of the franc shall first be submitted to the
 National Economic and Social Council and to the National Finance
 Commission for their advice.
 Art. 150. The finances of the Republic and of the provinces shall be
 kept separate.
 Art. 151. The National Bank shall be the guardian of the public funds.
 It shall be the bank of emission for the entire Republic. The organization
 and functioning of the National Bank shall be regulated by a national law,
 the bill concerning which shall first be submitted to the National Finance
 Commission and to the National Economic and Social Council for their
 advice.
 The national service of postal orders shall have its headquarters in the
 capital. Each province may open an account there.
 Provinces which do not have a branch of the National Bank may entrust
 the guardianship of their funds to another bank.
 Art. 152. Taxation may be imposed only by law.
 Contribution to the public expenditure shall be a duty of all citizens.
 No exceptions or diminutions of fiscal responsibility may be granted
 except by law.
 Art. 153. The goods, benefits or incomes of industrial or commercial
 activites of the provinces may not be subject to any tax by the Republic,
 nor those of the Republic to any tax by the provinces.
 Any duty on purchases or sales effected outside a province or on
 
 135
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 merchandise imported or exported into or from a province as part of
 interprovincial trade shall be forbidden.
 Art. 154. Only Parliament may legislate concerning custom duties,
 income taxes, taxes on enterprises and personal taxes.
 All other taxes including excise and consumption taxes may be establish-
 ed both by parliament and by the provincial assembly.
 Art. 155. Customs duties, national excise and consumption duties,
 and taxes on societies shall be collected by the central fiscal authorities.
 Except where national legislation provides otherwise, all other national
 taxes shall be collected by the provincial fiscal authorities. Parliament
 may, however, by law, delegate to a province the power to collect excise
 and consumption taxes or taxes on societies. A province may, by law,
 delegate to territorial units the power to collect taxes within their territory.
 Art. 156. (1) The revenue from import duties shall belong to the Republic.
 (2) The revenue from personal and income taxes shall belong to the
 province concerned.
 (3) The revenue from export duties, national excise and consumption
 taxes and taxes on societies shall be distributed between the State
 and the provinces in the following fashion:
 (a) a province's quota shall vary between a minimum of 45% and
 a maximum of 75% according to a sliding scale which shall vary in
 inverse function to the total of taxes involved originating in the
 province concerned. The province concerned in the sense of the
 third paragraph of this article means:
 - as concerns export duties, the province of origin of the exported
 products;
 - as concerns excise and consumption taxes, the province where
 the items taxed are produced;
 - as concerns taxes on societies, the province where the head-
 quarters subject to tax are located -
 (1) when this total is at least equal to the maximum amount
 set by a national law, the share of the province concerned shall
 be 45% of the total;
 (2) if the total is at most equal to the minimum fixed by the
 national law, the share of the province concerned shall be 75%
 of the total;
 (3) the same national law shall determine the total of inter-
 mediary taxes and the sliding scale for calculating their quotas;
 (b) the share which does not go to the province shall go to the State.
 (4) The revenue from all other taxes, duties, etc., shall belong to the
 Republic, the provinces or the territorial units according to which of
 them levies the charge.
 Art. 157. Each province may agree to leases of land, as well as mining
 and mineral concessions, including mineral oils.
 
 136
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 All rents and receipts arising from such leases and concessions shall be
 payable to the central government.
 The central government shall assign to the province fifty percent of
 the net rents and receipts it receives from the minerals and mineral oils
 extracted on the territory of the province including its continental shelf.
 Art. 158. The financial year of the Republic and of the provinces shall
 begin on January 1 and shall end on December 31.
 Art. 159. Each province shall ensure that its budget is in balance.
 However, in exceptional cases and for duly justified reasons, Parliament
 may, by law authorize, financial aid to a province to balance its budget.
 Art. 160. Upon the proposal of the President of the Republic, Parlia-
 ment may,, by law, authorize the intervention of the Republic in the
 investment expenses of a province.
 Art. 161. The Republic may neither loan nor guarantee the principal
 or interest of a loan, nor execute works on extraordinary receipts except
 if authorized to do so by national law.
 However, if the needs of the Treasury so require, the President of the
 Republic may, without prior authorization, renew treasury bonds whose
 interest and expiration date is at most five years.
 The provinces may contract no loan which has not been authorized by
 provincial law.
 Art. 162. The general accounts of the Republic shall be drawn up in a
 national law, the general accounts of each province in a provincial law.
 Art. 163. A Court of Accounts shall be instituted in the Republic,
 composed of counselors appointed by Parliament for a renewable term
 of six years.
 Candidates to counselor of the Court of Accounts shall give proofs of a
 technical education at university level or its equivalent, received in a
 higher institute or higher technical school of accounting, and of having
 worked for at least five years in a financial service.
 Without prejudice to the provisions of this title, the statute of counsel-
 ors of the Court of Accounts shall be similar to the statute of the judiciary
 provided in Title VI, section 3.
 The organization and functioning of the Court of Accounts shall be
 settled by a national law.
 Art. 164. The Court of Accounts duties shall be:
 (1) to examine and liquidate the accounts of the central administration
 and of the provincial administrations, as well as the accounts of all
 persons accountable to the treasury of the Republic or of the provinces:
 (2) to supervise the accounts of governmental establishments of the
 Republic and of the provinces, as well as the accounts of other organs
 and associations of the governmental authorities.
 It shall ensure that credits opened for different items of expenditure
 have not been exceeded or, where appropriate, that the additional
 
 137
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldvile)
 
 budgets and supplementary expenditures have been approved in ac-
 cordance with the law.
 It shall draw up the accounts of the different services of the Republic
 or the provinces and, for this purpose, request from all the appropriate
 authorities the information and documentation necessary.
 The general accounts of the Republic shall be submitted each year to
 Parliament with the observations of the Court.
 The general accounts of the provinces shall be submitted each year to
 the provincial assemblies concerned with the observations of the Court.
 Art. 165. A National Finance Commission shall be instituted composed
 of a president and six members appointed by the President of the Re-
 public.                                                   A
 A national law shall determine the manner of their appointment and
 the academic qualifications to be fulfilled.
 The Commission shall draw up its own procedure and carry out the
 functions assigned to it by this Constitution.
 Art. 166. The National Finance Commission shall make recommen-
 dations to the President of the Republic respecting:
 (1) the distribution between the Republic and the provinces of the
 taxes which they share, and the attribution to the different provinces
 of the share which is their due;
 (2) the basic principles which shall rule the central government in the
 granting of subsidies to a province in application of Articles 159 and 160;
 (3) any other questions of a financial or economic nature submitted to
 it by the President of the Republic.
 The President of the Republic shall, each year, communicate to Parlia-
 ment the various recommendations of the National Finance Commission
 in accordance with this article, together with an explanatory memorandum
 concerning the action taken.
 TITLE VIII
 THE ADMINISTRATION
 Art. 167. The administrative personnel of the national and provincial
 public services, of the courts and tribunals, shall be ruled by a statute
 drawn up by national law.
 This statute shall fix, in particular, conditions of recruitment, inter-
 ruption and termination of services, the rights and duties of officials,
 their career, activities incompatible with the public service, holidays and
 pensions.
 It shall lay down the principles concerning salaries and promotion.
 The administrative personnel of the national public services, of Parlia-
 ment, and of the courts, shall be the responsibility of the national auth-
 
 138
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 ority, that of the provincial public services, the provincial assemblies
 and courts shall be the responsibility of the provincial authorities.
 Art. 168. The personnel of private organizations of public interest, shall
 enjoy the social advantages granted to officials of the public adminis-
 tration.
 TITLE IX
 FORCES OF ORDER
 Section I. The Police
 Art. 169. A police force of the central government shall be organized
 for the city of Leopoldville.
 Each province shall have its own police force.
 The number, equipment, and basic principles of the organization of the
 police shall be determined by a national organic law.
 The discipline of the police forces, their control, recruitment, con-
 ditions of service of their members, shall be regulated by a national law
 as concerns the police force of the city of Leopoldville, and by a provincial
 law as concerns the provincial police forces.
 Section II. The Gendarmerie and the Armed Forces
 The Gendarmerie
 Art. 170. The gendarmerie shall form part of the national army and
 shall be under the central authority.
 It may not intervene in the internal affairs of a province except in the
 cases provided in Article 175 of this Constitution.
 The governor of the province or his delegates shall have the right to
 requisition the gendarmerie in accordance with a national law and in the
 cases and conditions provided by provincial law.
 The armed lorces
 Art. 171. There shall be only one single national army in the Republic
 consisting of the land, sea and air forces.
 A national law shall establish the manner of recruitment, the organi-
 zation, the rules of discipline, the conditions of service, and the rights
 and obligations of military personnel. Military service shall be obligatory
 and its organization and application shall be regulated by national law.
 Art. 172. The army shall be at the service of the entire Congolese
 nation. No authority may turn it from its proper purpose.
 Noone may organize military or paramilitary formations or private
 militias, nor maintain an armed or subversive group of young persons.
 
 139
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Art. 173. A Council of Defense shall be instituted in the Republic,
 whose organization, composition and functioning shall be regulated by
 nafional law.
 Art. 174. The establishment of foreign bases on the territory of the
 Republic shall be forbidden. No foreign troup may occupy or traverse
 the territory of the Republic except by permission of a national law.
 The army may not operate outside the country except under the con-
 ditions stipulated by national law.
 Art. 175. The armed forces may not intervene in the internal affairs of
 a province, nor substitute for the police forces except in the cases laid
 down by national law.
 Art. 176. The President of the Republic shall confer the ranks in the
 army and the gendarmerie. Noone may be promoted to a higher rank nor
 deprived of his rank, honors or pension except under the conditions
 stipulated by national law.
 Only Congolese shall be admitted to the national army to perform
 their military service.
 TITLE IX
 THE CONSTITUTIONAL COURT
 Art. 177. The Constitutional Court shall consist of twelve counselors
 whose term of office, not immediately renewable, shall be nine years.
 One third of the Court shall be renewed every three years. The counsel-
 ors to the Constitutional Court shall be appointed one third by the gover-
 nor's Conference, one third by the two secretariats of the national legis-
 lative chambers meeting together, and one third by the High Council of
 the Judiciary.
 Noone may be appointed counselor to the Court unless he is Congolese
 and fulfils the conditions of eligibility to the Senate and, in addition,
 unless for at least ten years he has been a lawyer, exercised judicial
 functions or taught law in a university or other institution .of higher
 learning.
 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Constitution, the
 functions of counselor to the Constitutional Court shall be incompatible
 with those of member of the central or a provincial government or with
 the office of member of Parliament or of a provincial assembly. Other
 offices incompatible with the office of counselor shall be stipulated by a
 national organic law.
 The Court shall elect its president from among its members.
 Art. 178. Before taking office, the counselors of the Constitutional
 Court shall take the following oath before the President of the Republic
 
 140
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldvile)
 
 in the presence of Parliament, of the central Government, of the governors
 of the provinces and of the Supreme Court of Justice:
 "I swear to fulfil well and faithfully my duties, to exercise my office
 impartially in respect of the national Constitution, to observe the secrecy
 of the deliberations and votes, and to take up no position in public, nor
 to give any advice on questions within the competence of the Consti-
 tutional Court."
 Art. 179. The Constitutional Court shall consider:
 (1) differences with respect to the constitutionality of laws and acts
 having the force of law;
 (2) all questions relating to the interpretation of this Constitution
 and in particular conflicts of authority respecting the extent of the
 authority and obligations of the national or provincial organs invested
 by this Constitution with specific powers;
 (3) all matters assigned to it by this Constitution;
 (4) all matters assigned to it by national legislation.
 The Constitutional Court shall supervise the regularity of the election of
 the President of the Republic and the governors of the provinces. It
 shall examine disputes and proclaim the results of the voting.
 The Court shall rule, in cases of dispute, on the regularity of the elections
 of members of Parliament and the provincial assemblies, and on decla-
 rations of disqualification pronounced by the assembly to which they
 belong, in accordance with Articles 84 and 128.
 It shall supervise the regularity of referendum operations and proclaim
 the results.
 The authoritative interpretation of laws shall be the exclusive province
 of the Constitutional Court.
 Any draft provincial constitution adopted by a provincial assembly shall
 be submitted to the Constitutional Court for its opinion before promulgation.
 Art. 180. Matters shall be referred to the Constitutional Court by the
 President of the Republic, by the provincial Governors and by members
 of the central and provincial governments, in the cases provided in Article
 179, (1) and (2), when permitted by this Constitution or by national
 legislation.
 Matters shall be referred to the Court by the presidents of the assemblies,
 by the central Government or by the Supreme Court of Justice, in the cases
 provided in Article 179 (1) and (2), when permitted by this Constitution
 or by national legislation, and, in the cases provided in Article 179 (2) and
 (3), by any member of Parliament or of a provincial assembly who has
 been declared dismissed in accordance with this Constitution or national
 legislation.
 Art. 181. Decrees and ordinances of the Constitutional Court shall be
 binding on the administrative and judicial authorities. They may not be
 appealed to any jurisdiction whatsoever.
 
 141
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 Any legislative act which is declared incompatible with this Consti-
 tution shall be automatically abrogated.
 Unconstitutionality of one or more provisions of a legislative act shall
 not necessarily involve abrogation of the entire act.
 The Court shall be the sovereign judge in such a question.
 Art. 182. A national organic law shall regulate in detail the organization
 and functioning of the Constitutional Court and the procedure to be follow-
 ed before it.
 TITLE X
 ACTIVITIES INCOMPATIBLE WITH NATIONAL
 OFFICE
 Art. 183. The function of President of the Republic shall be incom-
 patible with any other public or private activity whether remunerated
 or not.
 The provisions of the above paragraph shall not apply to the functions
 which the President of the Republic may be called upon to exercise within
 the framework of international organizations and institutions.
 Art. 184. Noone may at the same time be a member of the central and a
 provincial government.
 The functions of member of the central or a provincial government
 shall be incompatible with the exercise of any other public function or
 elective office. However, a member of the central government elected to
 Parliament or to a provincial assembly at elections taking place before
 the end of the term of the central government, may continue to exercise
 his ministerial functions until the formation of the government replacing
 that to which he belongs. He shall not, however, at the same time enjoy
 parliamentary immunity.
 No member of the central or a provincial government may engage
 directly in trade. A national organic law shall list the professional activities
 incompatible with the function of member of the central or a provincial
 government.
 Art. 185. Noone may be a member at the same time of the Chamber of
 Deputies and of the Senate, nor of Parliament and a provincial assembly.
 No member of Parliament or of a provincial assembly may exercise any
 public office or elective mandate in any other place in the Republic.
 However, a traditional customary chief who is elected or co-opted member
 of a provincial assembly, shall continue to exercise his functions and
 enjoy the advantages accruing to him in his chieftainship.
 Any member of Parliament or of a provincial assembly appointed mem-
 ber of the central or a provincial government who accepts such an appoint-
 ment, shall lose his elective office upon approval by Parliament or the
 
 142
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 provincial assembly of the act appointing the members of the government
 to which he has been appointed.
 Art. 186. No magistrate may accept any salaried function from the cen-
 tral or a provincial government unless he exercises it without recompense.
 No magistrate may be member of Parliament or of a provincial assembly.
 The office of counselor to the Court of Accounts shall be incompatible
 with any other public or private function and with any elective office.
 Art. 187. A national organic law shall cover any other cases of incom-
 patible activities.
 TITLE XIII
 CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT
 Art. 188. The President of the Republic, the Governors' Conference,
 each chamber of Parliament and one fourth of the provincial assemblies,
 alike, shall have the right to initiate amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 189. An amendment bill must be approved by each Chamber by
 a two thirds majority of its members. The President shall then promulgate
 it in accordance with Article 100, and the text shall enter immediately into
 effect.
 Art. 190. The approval of at least two thirds of all the provincial
 assemblies shall, however, be required if an amendment bill modifies the
 provisions of the following:
 Title I, Section I, General provisions; Title IV, Fundamental Rights;
 Title III, Distribution of legislative authority between the Republic and
 the provinces; Title IV, National Institutions; Articles 55, 56, 58, Election
 and term of the President of the Republic; Article 61, Promulgation of
 laws; Article 64, Termination of office of members of the central govern-
 ment; Article 69, Appointment of members of the central government;
 Article 70, Inauguration of members of the central government; Article
 71, 72, Powers of members of the central government; Article 73, 74,
 Political responsibility of members of the central government; Articles
 77, 78, Criminal responsibility of the President of the Republic and other
 members of the government; Article 79, Governors' Conference; Article 80,
 Composition of Parliament; Article 81 : 2, Representation of the provinces
 in the Senate; Article 82, Term of the legislature, conditions of eligibility
 and voting; Article 84, End of the term of Parliament; Article 96, 97,
 101, 102, Elaboration of the laws; Article 104, Martial law; Article 106,
 Parliamentary immunities; Title V, Provincial institutions; Title VI,
 section I, General provisions; Title VII, Auxiliary organs; Title VIII-
 Articles 152, 153, 155-158, 161, 163, 164, Public finances; Title X, Article
 174; Title XI, the Constitutional Court; Title XII, Constitutional amend-
 ment.
 
 143
 
 
 Art. 101. The provincial assemblies shall vote on the whole bill of
 amendment and shall approve it or reject it as a whole.
 If the rejected bill contains a number of articles, the assembly shall
 reconsider it article by article.
 If the assembly rejects an article, it shall propose amendments thereto.
 If amendments proposed by the provincial assemblies relate solely
 to one or more articles, the chambers may examine only these amendments.
 They shall be supplemented, for such examination, by a delegation from
 the provincial assemblies composed of two counselors from each assembly,
 with which they shall consult for the purpose of drawing up a new text.
 The new text shall be adopted by the chambers by the majority provided
 in Article 189, and shall be submitted for approval to the provincial
 assemblies.
 On the second round, a bill of amendment shall be considered approved
 when passed by an absolute majority of all the assemblies.
 Art. 192. The definitions appropriate to the political structures establish-
 ed by this Constitution, shall be introduced progressively into official
 acts, starting from the third legislature following the entry into force of
 this Constitution. The text containing the draft terminology annexed to
 the explanatory memorandum accompanying this Constitution shall enter
 into force only from that time.
 TITLE XIV
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 193. The adoption of this Constitution by referendum shall entail
 the dissolution of the legislative chambers instituted since June 80, 1960,
 in accordance with the Fundamental Law of May 19, 1960.
 This dissolution of Parliament shall entail that of the present govern-
 ment. The Head of State shall form a government entrusted with pre-
 paring the legislative elections which must take place within six months
 following adoption of this Constitution. This government shall be composed
 of at most eighteen members.
 The President of the Republic shall exercise the legislative power by
 means of ordinances until the installation of the legislative chambers.
 Art. 194. After the entry into force of this Constitution, the provincial
 assemblies and governments shall continue to exercise their powers within
 the framework of this Constitution until the establishment of new insti-
 tutions.
 However, in order to prepare and control the elections provided in
 Article 216, paragraph 2, a special commission shall be instituted in each
 province and in the city of Leopoldville which shall have control of the
 forces of order.
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 144
 
 
 This commission shall be composed of six members, two of which shall
 be chosen from among officials of the population statistical department,
 and who may be candidates in the elections. Two members shall be chosen
 from among the representatives of national economic and social organi-
 zations who participated in drawing up the draft constitution. They may
 not be natives of the province to which the commission they belong to is
 assigned. Two members shall be appointed by the provinces so as to
 represent the majority and opposition parties.
 Art. 195. All legislative and regulatory texts adopted before the
 adoption of this Constitution shall remain in force until they have been
 abrogated or modified.
 Notwithstanding the provisions of the above paragraph, no legislative
 or regulatory text shall have effect if it is incompatible with any pro-
 vision of this Constitution.
 The expression "existing legislative and regulatory texts" shall cover
 all legislative and regulatory texts issued in the Congo by a competent
 legislative or other authority before the entry into force of this Consti-
 tution.
 No provision of this article shall be interpreted so as to extend a
 temporary law beyond the date fixed for its expiry or which would have
 ceased to be effective if the present Constitution had not entered into force.
 Art. 196. The adoption of this Constitution shall entail the abrogation
 of the Fundamental Law of May 19, 1960, relating to the structures of the
 Congo, and of that of June 17, 1960, relating to the public liberties.
 Art. 197. From the date of the financial year following the adoption
 of this Constitution, the distribution of the revenues from export duties,
 consumption and excise taxes and taxes on societies provided in Articles
 156 : 3, shall be made as follows:
 30 to 40% to the Republic;
 80-40% to the province concerned;
 30 to 40% distributed among all the provinces.
 The share reserved to all the provinces shall be deposited in a special
 account. It shall be used principally to cover the expenses of functioning
 and eventually those of investment. It shall be distributed among the
 provinces according to fiscal capacity, need and requirements of the
 provinces.
 During the financial year of the adoption of this Constitution, the exist-
 ing system of subsidies shall continue.
 Art. 198. Following the adoption of this Constitution, the Head of
 State shall become President of the Republic and shall remain in office
 until the election of a president in accordance with the provisions of this
 Constitution.
 Art. 199. The Constitutional Court shall consist of seven counselors
 of whom at least four shall be Congolese.
 
 Gongo (Leopoldwille)
 
 145
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)
 
 The President of the Republic shall appoint the president and counselors
 to the Constitutional Court upon presentation of candidatures by the
 Governors' Conference.
 The Court shall elect its president from among its members. Noone may
 be elected president of the Constitutional Court unless he is Congolese
 and has completed 40 years of age.
 The functions of president or counselor at the Constitutional Court
 shall not be compatible with any other similar office in other courts and
 tribunals.
 Art. 200. Until the creation of the Constitutional Court, the Court of
 Appeal of Leopoldville shall exercise the powers conferred by this Consti-
 tution on it.
 Art. 201. The Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court of Justice
 shall be constituted in accordance with the provisions of Article 177,
 within twelve years following the entry into force of this Constitution.
 The first Constitutional Court instituted in accordance with the pro-
 visions of Article 194, shall include four members appointed for three
 years, four members appointed for six years and four members appointed
 for nine years.
 Art. 202. The Supreme Court of Justice shall include twelve counselors
 of whom at least six shall be Congolese.
 Noone may be counselor at the Supreme Court of Justice unless he has
 a degree or doctorate of law.
 The President and counselors of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be
 appointed by the President of the Republic on the proposal of the President
 of the Court of Appeal and of the Attorney General.
 Art. 203. Until formal institution of the Supreme Court of Justice,
 the Courts of Appeal shall be competent to try the persons listed in
 Article 1, paragraph 2.
 Art. 204. From the time of the entry into force of this Constitution
 and during a period of twelve years, the following may be admitted as
 counsellors at the Court of Accounts:
 (1) persons listed in Article 187 of the Constitution who have exercised
 those functions during at least two years in a financial service;
 (2) holders of a six year post-primary diploma or of a diploma of
 accounting recognized by the State who have directed during at least
 two years a financial service in a public or private organization. Candi-
 dates shall be obliged, moreover, to take an admittance examination;
 (3) foreigners who fulfil the criteria provided in Article 187, the
 number of which may not exceed one third of the members of the Court.
 The term of a foreign counselor shall be renewable only if there is no
 national candidate who fulfils the conditions set by Article 187.
 
 1 Blank in the original text.
 
 146
 
 
 Congo (Leopoldville)                       147
 The functions of president and vice-president may not be exercised by a
 foreigner.
 Art. 205. From the date of the entry into force of this Constitution,
 any territory under the administration of a province but geographically
 situated in another province, shall automatically cease to be under such
 administration and shall come under the administration of the province
 where it is geographically located. No such enclaves shall be created in
 the future.
 Art. 206. Until the reorganization of the judiciary which will place
 career judges in all the courts and tribunals, press and political misde-
 meanors and infringements committed in connection with labor disputes,
 shall come within the competence of tribunals of the first instance.
 
 
</pre>
