<pre>
 LAWS OF KENYA
 
 THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
 Revised edition 2008 (2001)
 Published by the National Council for Law Reporting
 with the Authority of the Attorney General.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
 ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
 CHAPTER I - THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
 Section
 I - Declaration of Republic.
 IA-Political system.
 2 - Public Seal.
 2A- (Repealed).
 3 - Constitution of Republic of Kenya.
 CHAPTER II -THE EXECUTIVE
 Part I - The President and the Vice - President
 4- The office of President.
 5 - Election of President.
 6 - Vacancy in office of President.
 7 - Assumption of office of President.
 8 - Oath of President.
 9 - Term of office of President.
 10 - Determination of questions as to validity of presidential elections, etc.
 11 - Exercise of President's functions during absence, illness, etc.
 12 - Removal of President on grounds of incapacity.
 13 - Salary and allowances of President.
 14 - Protection of President in respect of legal proceedings during office.
 15 - The Vice- President of Kenya.
 15A- Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Ministers.
 Part 2 - Ministers and the Cabinet
 16 - Ministers of Government of Kenya.
 17 - Cabinet.
 18 -Allocation of portfolios to Ministers.
 19 - Assistant Ministers.
 20 - Absence of Vice-President, Ministers and Assistant Ministers from Kenya.
 21 - Oaths to be taken by Ministers and Assistant Ministers.
 22 - Appointing of permanent secretaries.
 Part 3 - Executive Powers
 23 - Executive authority of Government of Kenya.
 24 - Constitution of offices.
 25 -Tenure of office in the service of the Republic.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Section
 26 -Attorney - General.
 27 - Prerogative of mercy.
 28 -Advisory Committee on Prerogative of Mercy.
 29 - Functions of Advisory Committee on Prerogative of Mercy.
 CHAPTER III - PARLIAMENT
 Part ] - Composition of Parliament
 30 - Legislative power.
 31 - Composition of National Assembly.
 32 - Election of elected members.
 33 - Nominated members.
 34 - Qualifications for election.
 35 - Disqualifications for election.
 36 - Attorney-General to be member of National Assembly.
 37 - Speaker of National Assembly.
 38 - Deputy Speaker of National Assembly.
 39 - Vacation of seat in National Assembly.
 40 - Vacation of seat in National Assembly upon resignation from party.
 41 - Electoral Commission.
 42 - Constituencies.
 42A - Conduct of elections.
 43 - Qualifications and disqualifications for registration as a voter.
 44 - Determination of questions as to membership of National Assembly.
 45 - (Repealed.)
 Part ]A The Parliamentary Service and the Parliamentary Service Commission.
 45A -Parliamentary Service.
 45B - Parliamentary Service Commission.
 Part 2 - Legislation and Procedure in the National Assembly
 46 - Exercise of legislative power of Parliament.
 47 -Alteration of Constitution.
 48 - Restrictions with regard to certain financial measures.
 49 - Oaths to be taken by members of National Assembly.
 50 - Presiding in National Assembly.
 51 - Quorum in National Assembly.
 52 - Powers of President in Parliament.
 53 - Official languages.
 54 - Voting in National Assembly.
 55 - Unqualified persons sitting or voting.
 56 - Regulation of procedure in National Assembly.
 57 - Powers, privileges and immunities of National Assembly.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Part 3 - Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliament
 Section
 58 - Summoning of Parliament.
 59 - Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament.
 CHAPTER IV - THE JUDICATURE
 Part ] - The High Court and the Court of Appeal
 60 - Establishment of High Court.
 61 -Appointment of judges of High Court.
 62 -Tenure of office of judges of High Court.
 63 - Oaths to be taken by judges of High Court.
 64 - Establishment of Court of Appeal.
 Part 2 - Other Courts
 65 - Establishment of other courts.
 66 - Kadhi's courts.
 67 - References and appeals on interpretation of Constitution.
 Part 3 - The Judicial Service Commission
 68 - Judicial Service Commission.
 69 -Appointment, etc., of judicial officers.
 CHAPTER V - PROTECTION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF THE INDIVIDUAL
 70 - Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual.
 71 - Protection of right to life.
 72 - Protection of right to personal liberty.
 73 - Protection from slavery and forced labour.
 74 - Protection from inhuman treatment.
 75 - Protection from deprivation of property.
 76 - Protection against arbitrary search or entry.
 77 - Provisions to secure protection of law.
 78 - Protection of freedom of conscience.
 79 - Protection of freedom of expression.
 80 - Protection of freedom of assembly and association.
 81 - Protection of freedom of movement.
 82 - Protection from discrimination on grounds of race, etc.
 83 - Derogation from fundamental rights and freedoms.
 84 - Enforcement of protective provisions.
 85 - Preservation of public security.
 86 - Interpretation and savings.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 CHAPTER VI - CITIZENSHIP
 Section
 87 - Persons who become citizens on 121 December, 1963.
 88 - Persons entitled to be registered as citizens by virtue of connexion with
 Kenya before 121 December, 1963.
 89 - Persons born in Kenya after 11t' December, 1963.
 90 - Persons born outside Kenya after 11I December, 1963.
 91 - Marriage to Kenya citizen.
 92 - Persons eligible to be registered as Kenya citizens.
 93 - Persons eligible to be naturalized as Kenya citizens.
 94 - Deprivation of citizenship.
 95 - Commonwealth citizens.
 96 - Powers of Parliament.
 97 - Dual citizenship.
 98 - Interpretation.
 CHAPTER VII - FINANCE
 99 - Consolidated Fund and other funds of the Government of Kenya.
 100 -Authorization of expenditure from Consolidated Fund by appropriation.
 101 -Authorization of expenditure in advance of appropriation.
 102 - Contingencies Fund.
 103 - Public debt of Government of Kenya.
 104 - Remuneration of certain officers.
 105 - Controller and Auditor-General.
 CHAPTER VIII - THE PUBLIC SERVICE
 106 - Public Service Commission.
 107 - Appointment, etc., of public officers.
 108 -Appointment, etc., of members of Kenya Police Force
 109 - Attorney-General.
 110 - Controller and Auditor-General.
 111 - Appointment of Permanent Secretaries, Ambassadors, etc.
 112 - Pensions laws and protection of pensions rights.
 113 - Power to withhold pensions, etc.
 CHAPTER IX - TRUST LAND
 114 - Interpretation of Chapter.
 115 -Trust land to vest in county councils.
 116 - Registration of individual titles to Trust land.
 117 - Setting apart of Trust land by county councils.
 118 - Setting apart of Trust land for purposes of Government, etc.
 119 - Land no longer required for purposes of Government, etc.
 120 - Escheat of rights in former Trust land.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 CHAPTER X - GENERAL
 Section
 121 - Resignations.
 122 - Re-appointments and concurrent appointments.
 123 - Interpretation.
 CHAPTER XI- TRANSITORY
 124 - Effect of Chapter.
 125 -Appeals in respect of certain decisions affecting pensions benefits.
 126 - Compulsory retirement to facilitate appointment of local candidates.
 127 - (Repealed).
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
 CHAPTER 1
 THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
 1. Kenya is a sovereign Republic.
 
 IA. The Republic of Kenya shall be a multiparty democratic
 state.
 2. The Public Seal of Kenya shall be such device as may be
 prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 
 5 of 1969, 2nd Sch.,
 2of 1974, 1 of 1975,
 14 of 1975, 13 of 1977,
 1 of 1979,5 of 1979.
 7 of 1982, 7 of 1984,
 6 of 1985, 14 of 1986,
 20 of 1987,4 of 1988,
 17of 1990, 10of 1991,
 12 of 1991, 6 of 1992,
 9 of 1997,3 of 1999,
 L.N. 6/ 2006.
 3 of 2008.
 Declaration of
 Republic.
 
 Political system.
 9 of 1997, s. 2.
 Public Seal.
 
 2A. (Repealed by 12 of 1991, s. 2).
 
 3. This Constitution is the Constitution of the Republic of Kenya
 and shall have the force of law throughout Kenya and, subject to
 section 47, if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this
 Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the
 inconsistency, be void-
 Provided that the provisions of this section as to consistency with
 this Constitution shall not apply in respect of an Act made pursuant to
 to section 15A(3).
 
 Constitution of
 Republic of Kenya.
 3 of 2008
 
 CHAPTER II
 THE EXECUTIVE
 PART I
 THE PRESIDENT AND THE VICE-PRESIDENT
 
 4. There shall be a President of Kenya, who shall be the Head of
 State and Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces of the Republic.
 5. (1) The President shall be elected in accordance with this
 Chapter and, subject thereto, with any Act of Parliament regulating the
 election of a President.
 (2) A person shall be qualified to be nominated for election as
 President if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he -
 
 The office of
 President.
 
 Election of President.
 7 of 1982, s.3.
 12 of 1991, s.3,
 6 of 1992, s.3.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (a) is a citizen of Kenya; and
 (b) has attained the age of thirty-five years; and
 (c) is registered in some constituency as a voter in elections to
 the National Assembly.
 (3) Whenever Parliament is dissolved, an election of a President
 shall be held at the ensuing general election, and at that election -
 (a) each political party taking part in the general election shall
 nominate one candidate for President in such manner as may
 be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament;
 (b) the nomination of a candidate for President shall not be
 valid unless it is supported, in such manner as may be
 prescribed by or under anAct of Parliament, by not less than
 one thousand persons registered as voters in elections to the
 National Assembly;
 (c) where only one candidate for President is validly nominated,
 and that candidate is elected as a member of the National
 Assembly, he shall be declared to be elected as President;
 (d) where more than one candidate for President is validly
 nominated, a poll shall be taken in each constituency for
 the election of a President (whether or not a poll is required
 to be taken for an election to the National Assembly in that
 constituency);
 (e) in every constituency in which a poll is required to be taken
 both for the election of a President and for the election of
 a member of the National Assembly separate polls shall be
 taken;
 (f) the candidate for President who is elected as a member of
 the National Assembly and who receives a greater number
 of valid votes cast in the presidential election than any other
 candidate for President and who, in addition, receives a
 minimum of twenty-five per cent of the valid votes cast in
 at least five of the eight provinces shall be declared to be
 elected as President.
 (4) A fresh election of a President shall be commenced and held
 in the manner prescribed by subsection (5) where -
 (a) no candidate for President has been validly nominated before
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 the expiration of the time for the delivery of nominations in
 a presidential election;
 (b) a candidate for President who is validly nominated dies
 on or before any of the days on which the poll is taken in a
 presidential election;
 (c) a candidate for President, who would but for his death have
 been entitled to be declared elected as President under this
 section, dies after the taking of the poll has begun in the
 presidential election and before he has been declared elected
 as President;
 (d) no candidate is duly elected in accordance with this
 section:
 Provided that where a fresh election is held pursuant to paragraph
 (d) of this subsection, the only candidates shall be -
 (i) the candidate who scored the highest number of votes at
 the election; and
 (ii) one among the remaining candidates who has the highest
 total of votes cast at the election.
 (5) In the election of a President otherwise than at a general
 election -
 (a) every candidate for President shall be nominated by a
 political party in the manner prescribed by or under an Act
 of Parliament from amongst the elected members of the
 National Assembly.
 (b) the nomination of a candidate for President shall not be
 valid unless it is supported, in such manner as may be
 prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, by not less than
 one thousand persons registered as voters in elections to the
 National Assembly;
 (c) where only one candidate for President is validly nominated
 he shall be declared to be elected as President;
 (d) where more than one candidate for President is validly
 nominated, a poll shall be taken in each constituency for the
 election of a President;
 (e) the candidate for President who receives a greater number
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Vacancy in office of
 President.
 
 Cap. 57.
 
 Assumption of office
 of President.
 6 of 1992. s. 4,
 9 of 1997. s. 3.
 
 of valid votes cast in the presidential election than any
 other candidate and who, in addition, receives a minimum
 of twenty-five per cent of the votes cast in at least five
 of the eight provinces shall be declared to be elected as
 President.
 6. (1) If the office of President becomes vacant by reason of the
 death or resignation of the President, or by reason of his ceasing to hold
 office by virtue of section 10 or section 12, an election of a President
 shall be held within the period of ninety days immediately following the
 occurrence of that vacancy, and shall be held in the manner prescribed
 by section 5 (5).
 (2) While the office of President is vacant as aforesaid, the
 functions of that office shall be exercised -
 (a) by the Vice-President; or
 (b) if there is no Vice-President, or if the Vice-President
 considers that he is for any reason unable to discharge the
 functions of the office of President, by such Minister as may
 be appointed by the Cabinet.
 (3) Where the Vice-President or any other Minister is exercising
 the functions of the office of President by virtue of this section or of
 section 11, he shall not act, except in accordance with a resolution of
 the Cabinet, in the exercise of the powers relating to -
 (a) the preservation of public security under section 85, or under
 Part III of the Preservation of Public Security Act;
 (b) the prorogation and dissolution of Parliament under
 subsections (1) and (3) of section 59;
 (c) the appointment and removal of Ministers and Assistant
 Ministers under sections 16 and 19;
 (d) the assignment of responsibility to a Minister under section
 18; or
 (e) the giving of consent to a Minister or Assistant Minister
 absenting himself from Kenya under section 20.
 7. A person elected as President in accordance with this
 Constitution shall assume office as President as soon as he is declared
 to be elected.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 8. A person assuming the office of President shall, before entering Oath of
 upon the office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and such oath President
 for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by or under an
 Act of Parliament.
 9. (1) The President shall hold office for a term of five years Term of office of
 beginning from the date on which he is sworn in as President.  President.
 6 of 1992, s. 5.
 (2) No person shall be elected to hold office as President for more
 than two terms.
 (3) The President shall, unless his office becomes vacant by reason
 of his death, his resignation or his ceasing to hold office by virtue of
 section 10 or section 12, continue in office until the person elected as
 President at a subsequent presidential election assumes office.
 (4) The holding of the office of President shall be incompatible
 with the holding of any office of profit or of an office in any professional
 or labour organization and with any professional activity or any other
 public employment.
 Determination
 10. (1) Subject to this section, section 44 shall apply to the hearing of questions as
 and determination of a question whether a person has been validly to validity of
 elected as President, as it applies to the hearing and determination of presidential elections,
 a question whether a person has been validly elected as a member of etc.
 the National Assembly.
 (2) Where a person applies to the High Court for the determination
 of more than one of the following questions, namely, whether the
 President was qualified to be nominated for election as President, or
 was validly elected as President, or was validly elected as a member
 of the National Assembly, he shall make one application only to the
 High Court.
 (3) Where at any time the High Court determines under section
 44 that the President has not been validly elected as a member of the
 National Assembly, or that the seat in the Assembly of the President has
 become vacant, the High Court shall declare the seat in the Assembly
 of the President to be vacant, and -
 (a) an election shall be commenced forthwith and shall be held
 in the constituency for which the President stood for election
 as a member of the Assembly; and
 
 (b) if the President is not elected as a member of the Assembly
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Exercise of
 President's functions
 during absence.
 illness, etc.
 Removal of President
 on grounds of
 incapacity.
 
 at that election, he shall cease to hold office as President upon
 the expiration of the time allowed by law for the making of
 an application to the High Court under section 44 in respect
 of that election, or, where such an application is made by him
 or by the Attorney-General, upon the High Court determining
 that the person declared to be elected at that election has
 been validly elected:
 Provided that -
 (i) if the High Court determines, in relation to an election
 held pursuant to paragraph (a) at which a person other
 than the President has been declared to be elected, that
 that person has not been validly elected, the High Court
 shall declare the seat to be vacant and a further election
 shall be held pursuant to paragraph (b) and this proviso
 shall apply accordingly;
 (ii) notwithstanding that his seat in the Assembly has been
 declared to be vacant, the President shall be entitled
 to sit as a member of the Assembly and to exercise all
 the powers and privileges of an elected member of the
 Assembly until he ceases to hold office as President.
 (4) Where the High Court determines under section 44 that the
 President has not been validly elected as President for any reason other
 than that he has not been validly elected as a member of the National
 Assembly or that the seat in the Assembly of the President has become
 vacant, he shall cease to hold office as President.
 11. Where the President intends to be absent from Kenya, or where
 he considers it desirable by reason of illness or any other cause to do
 so, he may in writing appoint the Vice-President to exercise, subject to
 section 6 (3) and subject to such restrictions or exceptions as he may
 specify, the functions of his office.
 12. (1) Any question whether the President, or any other person
 exercising or about to exercise the functions of the office of President, is
 unable by reason of physical or mental infirmity to exercise the functions
 of that office, shall be determined in accordance with this section.
 (2) Where the question is whether a person has become unable by
 reason of physical or mental infirmity to exercise the functions of the
 office of President, and the Chief Justice is requested by resolution of
 the Cabinet conveyed to him by the Speaker of the National Assembly
 to cause that question to be determined, then -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (a) the Chief Justice shall appoint a tribunal, which shall consist
 of not less than five persons appointed by him from among
 persons who are qualified as medical practitioners under the
 law of Kenya, and who shall include any person nominated
 for appointment in accordance with subsection (5); and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and make a report to
 the Chief Justice, stating the opinion of the tribunal whether
 or not the person in respect of whom the question arises is,
 by reason of physical or mental infirmity, unable to discharge
 the functions of the office of President; and
 (c) the Chief Justice shall certify accordingly under his hand
 and cause the certificate to be conveyed to the Speaker of
 the National Assembly:
 Provided that the Chief Justice shall cause the question to be
 determined without a resolution of the Cabinet if he receives a certificate
 under the hand of the Speaker of the National Assembly to the effect
 that there are no Ministers present in Kenya, other than a person with
 respect to whom the question arises, and that the Speaker considers that
 it is in the interests of Kenya that the question should be determined
 without delay.
 (3) Where the question is whether any person in respect of whom
 the Chief Justice has given a certificate in accordance with subsection (2)
 that he is unable to exercise the functions of the office of President, has
 ceased to be unable by reason of physical or mental infirmity to exercise
 those functions, and the Chief Justice is requested, by resolution of the
 Cabinet conveyed to him by the Speaker of the National Assembly, or by
 request under the hand of the person in respect of whom such certificate
 was given conveyed to him by the Speaker of the Assembly, to cause
 that question to be determined, then the Chief Justice shall appoint a
 tribunal in accordance with subsection (2) (a), and that tribunal shall
 inquire into the matter and report in accordance with paragraph (b) of
 that subsection, and the Chief Justice shall certify accordingly under
 his hand and cause the certificate to be conveyed to the Speaker of the
 Assembly.
 (4) Where the Speaker of the National Assembly has received a
 certificate of the Chief Justice pursuant to this section that the President is
 unable to discharge the functions of his office, and within the succeeding
 period of three months the Speaker has not received any certificate of
 the Chief Justice pursuant to this section that the President has ceased
 to be unable to discharge the functions of his office, the President shall
 cease to hold office upon the expiration of the said period.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (5) Where the Speaker conveys a resolution of the Cabinet to the
 Chief Justice under subsection (2) or (3), he shall forthwith notify the
 person in respect of whom the question arises, and that person may,
 by writing delivered to the Speaker within two days of his being so
 notified, nominate for appointment as members of the tribunal to be
 appointed by the Chief Justice under this section not more than two
 persons qualified to be so appointed.
 (6) A certificate of the Chief Justice under this section shall
 be conclusive for the purposes of this Constitution, and shall not be
 questioned in any court.
 (7) At any time when the office of Speaker of the National
 Assembly is vacant or the holder of that office is unable for any reason
 to exercise the functions vested in him by this section, those functions
 may be exercised by the Deputy Speaker of the Assembly.
 Salary and           13. (1) The President shall receive such salary, allowance
 allowances of  and benefits as may be determined by a resolution of the National
 President.     Assembly.
 6 of 1992. s. 6.
 (2) Where the President ceases to hold office, he shall be entitled
 to receive a pension, gratuity and other allowances together with such
 other benefits and facilities, including adequate security, office, staff
 and travel allowances, as may be prescribed by or under an Act of
 Parliament.
 (3) The salary and allowances payable to the President and any
 pension or gratuity payable to him on retirement shall be a charge upon
 the Consolidated Fund.
 (4) The salary, allowances and privileges of the President shall
 not be varied to his disadvantage while he holds office.
 (5) The pension and allowances payable to the President who has
 ceased to hold office and the facilities and other benefits available to
 him shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his lifetime.
 Protection of        14. (1) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted
 President in respect  or continued against the President while he holds office, or against any
 of legal proceedings  person while he is exercising the functions of the office of President.
 during office
 (2) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed in respect of
 anything done or omitted to be done shall be instituted or continued
 against the President while he holds office or against any person while
 he is exercising the functions of the office of President.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (3) Where provision is made by law limiting the time within which
 proceedings of any description may be brought against any person, a
 period of time during which a person holds or exercises the functions
 of the office of President shall not be taken into account in calculating
 any period of time prescribed by that law which determines whether
 any such proceedings as are mentioned in subsection (1) or (2) may be
 brought against that person.
 The Vice-President of
 15. (1) There shall be a Vice-President of Kenya, who shall be Kenya.
 appointed by the President.
 (2) The President shall appoint the Vice-President from among the
 Ministers who are elected members of the National Assembly:
 Provided that no appointment to the office of Vice-President shall
 be made at any time when the functions of the office of President are
 being exercised by any person other than the President.
 (3) The Vice-President shall be the principal assistant of the
 President in the discharge of his functions.
 (4) The Vice-President shall not enter upon the duties of his
 office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and
 such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by
 Parliament.
 (5) During his tenure of office, the Vice-President shall not hold
 any office of profit other than those of Vice-President, Minister and
 member of the National Assembly.
 (6) The office of the Vice-President shall become vacant -
 (a) if the President so directs; or
 (b) if the holder of the office ceases to be an elected member
 of the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of the
 dissolution of Parliament; or
 (c) upon the election of a person to the office of President.
 15A.(1) There shall be a Prime Minister of the Government of Prime Minister
 Kenya.                                                        and Deputy Prime
 (2) There shall be two Deputy Prime Ministers of the Government Ministers.
 of Kenya.                                                     A3/2008
 (3) Parliament may, by an Act of Parliament and notwithstanding
 any other provision of this Constitution, provide for-
 (a) the appointment and termination of office of the Prime
 Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers;
 (b) the functions and powers of the Prime Minister and Deputy
 Prime Ministers;
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (c) the establishment of a coalition Government;
 (d) any other matter incidental to or connected with the
 foregoing.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of any Act made under subsection (3),
 the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Ministers shall be Ministers
 of the Government of Kenya.
 (5) The Act made pursuant to subsection (3) immediately
 following the commencement of this section shall, while in force, be
 read as part of this Constitution.
 (6) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of an Act of
 Parliament made pursuant to subsection (3) immediately following the
 commencement of this section shall be held to be inconsistent with or
 in contravention of any provision of this Constitution.
 PART 2
 Ministers and the Cabinet
 Ministers of        16. (1) There shall be such offices of Minister of the Government
 Government of  of Kenya as may be established by Parliament or, subject to any
 Kenya.         provisions made by Parliament, by the President.
 9 of 1997. s. 4.    (2) The President shall, subject to the provisions of any written
 law, appoint the Ministers from among the members of the National
 Assembly:
 Provided that, if occasion arises for making an appointment to
 the office of any Minister while Parliament stands dissolved, a person
 who was a member of the National Assembly immediately before the
 dissolution may be appointed to that office.
 (3) The office of a Minister shall become vacant -
 (a) if the President so directs; or
 (b) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of
 the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of the
 dissolution of Parliament; or
 (c) in the case of a Minister who, immediately before the
 dissolution of Parliament, was a member of the National
 Assembly, if, when the Assembly first meets after that
 dissolution, he is not then a member thereof.
 (4) Whenever a person is elected to the office of President, the
 offices of all Ministers then holding office shall become vacant upon
 the occasion of the President first making one or more appointments
 to the office of Minister.
 Cabinet.            17. (1) There shall be a Cabinet consisting of the President, the
 A3/2008        Vice-President, Prime Minister, two Deputy Prime Ministers and the
 other Ministers.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (2) The function of the Cabinet shall be to aid and advise the
 President in the government of Kenya.
 (3) The Cabinet shall be collectively responsible to the National
 Assembly for all things done by or under the authority of the President
 or the Vice-President or any other Minister in the execution of his
 office.
 (4) The provisions of subsections (2) and (3) shall not apply in
 relation to -
 (a) the appointment and removal from office of the Vice-
 President, Ministers and Assistant Ministers under sections
 15, 16 and 19, the assignment of responsibility to any
 Minister under section 18, or the giving of consent under
 section 20 to the Vice-President, a Minister or an Assistant
 Minister absenting himself from Kenya;
 (b) the dissolution of Parliament; or
 (c) the matters referred to in section 27 (which relates to the
 exercise of the Prerogative of Mercy).
 18. Responsibility for any of the business of the government Allocation of
 of Kenya, including the administration of any of the departments of portfolios to
 Government, may be assigned to the Vice-President and the several Ministers
 Ministers as the President may, by directions in writing, determine.
 Assistant Ministers.
 19. (1) The President may appoint Assistant Ministers from among
 the members of the National Assembly to assist the President, Vice-
 President and Ministers in the performance of their duties:
 Provided that, if occasion arises for making an appointment while
 Parliament stands dissolved, a person who was a member of the National
 Assembly immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as an
 Assistant Minister.
 (2) The office of an Assistant Minister shall become vacant -
 (a) if the President so directs; or
 (b) if the holder of the office ceases to be a member of
 the National Assembly otherwise than by reason of the
 dissolution of Parliament; or
 (c) in the case of an Assistant Minister who, immediately
 before the dissolution of Parliament, was a member of the
 National Assembly, if when the Assembly first meets after
 that dissolution, he is not then a member thereof; or
 (d) upon the election of a person to the office of President.
 Absence of Vice-
 20. The Vice-President, a Minister or an Assistant Minister President. Ministers
 shall not absent himself from Kenya except with the consent of the and Assistant
 President.                                                     Ministers from
 Kenya.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Oaths to be taken
 by Ministers and
 Assistant Ministers.
 Appointment
 of permanent
 secretaries.
 Executive authority
 of Government of
 Kenya.
 
 21. A Minister or an Assistant Minister shall not enter upon the
 duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of
 allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be
 prescribed by Parliament.
 22. (1) The President may appoint such number of permanent
 secretaries as he may determine.
 (2) There shall be a permanent secretary to the Office of the
 President.
 (3) Where the Vice-President or any other Minister has been
 charged with responsibility for a department of Government he shall
 exercise general direction and control over that department and, subject
 to that direction and control, every department of Government shall be
 under the supervision of a permanent secretary.
 (4) The office of a permanent secretary shall be an office in the
 public service.
 (5) Two or more Government departments may be placed under
 the direct supervision of one permanent secretary and a Government
 department may be placed under the supervision of one or more
 permanent secretaries or two or more permanent secretaries.
 PART 3
 Executive Powers
 23. (1) The executive authority of the Government of Kenya shall
 vest in the President and, subject to this Constitution, may be exercised
 by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him.
 (2) Nothing in this section shall prevent Parliament from conferring
 functions on persons or authorities other than the President.
 
 Constitution of      24. Subject to this Constitution and any other law, the powers of
 offices.        constituting and abolishing offices for the Republic of Kenya, of making
 appointments to any such office and terminating any such appointment,
 shall vest in the President.
 
 25. (1) Save in so far as may be otherwise provided by this
 Constitution or by any other law, every person who holds office in
 the service of the Republic of Kenya shall hold that office during the
 pleasure of the President:
 Provided that this subsection shall not apply in the case of a person
 who enters into a contract of service in writing with the Government of
 Kenya by which he undertakes to serve the Government for a period
 which does not exceed three years.
 (2) In this section "office in the service of the Republic of Kenya"
 
 Tenure of office in
 the service of the
 Republic.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 means office in or membership of the public service, the armed forces of
 the Republic, the National Youth Service or any other force or service
 established for the Republic of Kenya.
 26. (1) There shall be anAttorney-General whose office shall be Attorney General
 an office in the public service.
 (2) The Attorney-General shall be the principal legal adviser to
 the Government of Kenya.
 (3) The Attorney-General shall have power in any case in which
 he considers it desirable so to do -
 (a) to institute and undertake criminal proceedings against
 any person before any court (other than a court-martial) in
 respect of any offence alleged to have been committed by
 that person;
 (b) to take over and continue any such criminal proceedings
 that have been instituted or undertaken by another person
 or authority; and
 (c) to discontinue at any stage before judgment is delivered
 any such criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by
 himself or another person or authority.
 (4) The Attorney-General may require the Commissioner of Police
 to investigate any matter which, in the Attorney-General's opinion,
 relates to any offence or alleged offence or suspected offence, and the
 Commissioner shall comply with that requirement and shall report to
 the Attorney-General upon the investigation.
 (5) The powers of theAttorney-General under subsections (3) and
 (4) may be exercised by him in person or by officers subordinate to him
 acting in accordance with his general or special instructions.
 (6) The powers conferred on the Attorney-General by paragraphs
 (b) and (c) of subsection (3) shall be vested in him to the exclusion of
 any other person or authority:
 Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted
 criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the
 withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or
 authority and with the leave of the court.
 (7) For the purposes of this section, an appeal from a judgment
 in criminal proceedings before any court, or a question of law reserved
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 for the purpose of those proceedings to any other court, shall be deemed
 to be part of those proceedings:
 Provided that the power conferred on the Attorney-General by
 subsection (3) (c) shall not be exercised in relation to an appeal by a
 person convicted in criminal proceedings or to a question of law reserved
 at the instance of such a person.
 (8) In the exercise of the functions vested in him by subsections
 (3) and (4) of this section and by sections 44 and 55, the Attorney-
 General shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other
 person or authority.
 Prerogative of mercy.  27. The President may -
 14 of 1975. s.2.
 (a) grant to a person convicted of an offence a pardon, either
 free or subject to lawful conditions;
 (b) grant to a person a respite, either indefinite or for a specified
 period, of the execution of a punishment imposed on that
 person for an offence;
 (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for a punishment
 imposed on a person for an offence;
 (d) remit the whole or part of a punishment imposed on a person
 for an offence or of a penalty or forfeiture otherwise due to
 the Republic on account of an offence; and
 (e) remove in whole or in part the non-qualification or the
 disqualification of a person, arising out of or in consequence
 of the report of an election court under the provisions of the
 Cap. 7.              National Assembly and Presidential Elections Act, from
 registration as an elector on a register of electors or from
 nomination for election as an elected member of the National
 Assembly.
 28. (1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the Prerogative
 Advisory Committee  of Mercy which shall consist of -
 on Prerogative of
 Mercy             (a) the Attorney-General; and
 (b) not less than three nor more than five other members
 appointed by the President, of whom at least one shall be a
 Minister and at least one shall be a person qualified to practice
 in Kenya as a medical practitioner.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (2) A member of the Committee appointed under subsection (1)
 (b) shall hold his seat thereon for such period as may be specified in
 the instrument by which he was appointed:
 Provided that his seat shall become vacant -
 (i) in the case of a person who at the date of his appointment
 was a Minister, if he ceases to be a Minister; or
 (ii) in any case, if the President in writing so directs.
 (3) The Committee may act notwithstanding a vacancy in its
 membership and its proceedings shall not be invalidated by the presence
 or participation of a person not entitled to be present at or to participate
 in its proceedings.
 (4) The Committee may regulate its own procedure.
 29. (1) Where a person has been sentenced to death (otherwise
 than by a court-martial) for an offence, the President shall cause a
 written report of the case from the trial judge, together with such other
 information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as he may
 require, to be considered at a meeting of theAdvisory Committee on the
 Prerogative of Mercy; and after obtaining the advice of the Committee
 he shall decide in his own judgment whether to exercise any of his
 functions under section 27.
 (2) The President may consult with the Committee before deciding
 whether to exercise any of his functions under section 27 in a case
 not falling within subsection (1), but he shall not be obliged to act in
 accordance with the advice of the Committee.
 CHAPTER III
 PARLIAMENT
 PART I
 Composition of Parliament
 30. The legislative power of the Republic shall vest in the
 Parliament of Kenya, which shall consist of the President and the
 National Assembly.
 31. Subject to this Constitution, the National Assembly shall
 consist of elected members elected in accordance with section 32,
 nominated members appointed in accordance with section 33 and the
 ex officio members.
 
 Functions of
 Advisory Committee
 on Prerogative of
 Mercy.
 
 Legislative power.
 Composition of
 National Assembly
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Election of elected
 members.
 6 of 1992. s. 7.
 
 Nominated members.
 9 of 1997. s. 5.
 
 Qualifications for
 election.
 I of 1979. s. 2,
 7 of 1982. s. 5,
 12 of 1991. s. 4.
 
 32. (1) Kenya shall be divided into constituencies in accordance
 with section 42, and each constituency shall elect one elected member
 to the National Assembly in such manner as, subject to this Constitution,
 may be prescribed by or under any law.
 (2) Every person who is registered in a constituency as a voter
 in elections of elected members shall, unless he is detained in lawful
 custody, or is disqualified by law from voting in those elections on
 the ground of his having been convicted of an offence connected with
 elections or on the ground of his having been reported guilty of such
 an offence by the court trying an election petition, be entitled so to vote
 in that constituency in accordance with the law; and no other person
 may so vote.
 (3) (Repealed by 6 of 1992, s. 7).
 33. (1) Subject to this section, there shall be twelve nominated
 members of the National Assembly appointed by the President following
 a general election, to represent special interests.
 (2) The persons to be appointed shall be persons who, if they had
 been nominated for a parliamentary election, would be qualified to be
 elected as members of the National Assembly.
 (3) The persons to be appointed shall be nominated by the
 parliamentary parties according to the proportion of every parliamentary
 party in the National Assembly, taking into account the principle of
 gender equality.
 (4) The proportions under subsection (3) shall be determined
 by the Electoral Commission after every general election and shall
 be signified by the chairman of the Commission to the leaders of the
 concerned parliamentary parties, the President and the Speaker.
 (5) The names of the nominees of parliamentary parties shall
 be forwarded to the President through the Electoral Commission who
 shall ensure observance of the principle of gender equality in the
 nominations.
 34. Subject to section 35, a person shall be qualified to be elected
 as a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be qualified
 unless, at the date of his nomination for election-
 (a) he is a citizen of Kenya who has attained the age of twenty-
 one years; and
 (b) he is registered in some constituency as a voter in elections
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 to the National Assembly; and
 (c) he is able to speak and, unless incapacitated by blindness
 or other physical cause, to read the Swahili and English
 languages well enough to take an active part in the
 proceedings of the National Assembly; and
 (d) he is nominated by a political party in the manner prescribed
 by or under an Act of Parliament.
 35. (1) Subject to any order made under subsection (6), a person Disqualifications for
 shall not be qualified to be elected as an elected member if, at the date election.
 of his nomination for election, he -                          5 of 1979, s. 2.
 (a) is, by virtue of his own act, under any acknowledgment of
 allegiance, obedience or adherence to a foreign state; or
 (b) is under sentence of death imposed on him by a court in
 Kenya, or is under sentence of imprisonment (by whatever
 name called) exceeding six months imposed on him by such
 a court or substituted by competent authority for some other
 sentence imposed on him by such a court; or
 (c) is, under any law in force in Kenya, adjudged to be of
 unsound mind; or
 (d) is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged bankrupt
 under any law in force in Kenya; or
 (e) subject to such exceptions and limitations as may be
 prescribed by Parliament, has an interest in a class or
 description of contract made with the Government of Kenya
 as may be prescribed by Parliament; or
 (f) holds or is acting in any office in the public service (including
 the office of judge or member of a court of law or an office to
 which section 69 applies), in the armed forces of the Republic
 or in a local government authority.
 (2) For the purpose of subsection (1) (b) -
 (a) two or more sentences of imprisonment that are required
 to be served consecutively shall be regarded as separate
 sentences if none of those sentences exceeds six months, and
 if any one of those sentences exceeds that term they shall be
 regarded as one sentence; and
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment
 imposed as an alternative to or in default of the payment
 of a fine.
 (3) Parliament may provide that a person who, at the date of his
 nomination for election, holds or is acting in an office that is prescribed
 by Parliament and the functions of which involve responsibility for or
 in connexion with the conduct of an election to the National Assembly
 or the compilation of a register of voters for the purpose of such an
 election shall not be qualified to be elected as a member of the National
 Assembly.
 (4) Parliament may provide that a person who is convicted by a
 court of an offence that is prescribed by Parliament and that is connected
 with the election of members of the National Assembly or of a local
 government authority, or who is reported guilty of such an offence by the
 court trying an election petition, shall not be qualified to be nominated
 for election as a member of the National Assembly for such period (not
 exceeding five years) following his conviction or, as the case may be,
 following the report of the court as may be so prescribed.
 (5) Parliament may provide that a particular office shall be deemed
 to be or not to be an office for the purposes of subsection (1) (f).
 (6) The Minister for the time being responsible for elections to
 the National Assembly may, by order published in the Kenya Gazette,
 provide that a person shall not be qualified to be elected by virtue
 of holding an office specified in paragraph (f) of subsection (1), or
 specified for the purposes of that paragraph under subsection (5), which
 is prescribed in the order, if he holds that office after a date prescribed
 in the order, which date shall not be more than six months prior to the
 date of nomination for preliminary elections prescribed under an Act
 of Parliament:
 Provided that no order under this subsection shall be made to
 operate with retrospective effect.
 Attorney-General     36. The Attorney-General shall be an ex officio member of the
 to be member of  National Assembly, but he shall not be entitled to vote on any question
 National Assembly.  before the Assembly.
 Speaker of National  37. (1) There shall be a Speaker of the National Assembly, who
 Assembly.      shall be elected by the Assembly, in accordance with the standing orders,
 from among persons who are members of the Assembly or are qualified
 to be elected as such members, other than the President, the Vice-
 President, Ministers, Assistant Ministers and the Attorney-General.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (2) The Speaker shall vacate his office -
 (a) when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution
 of Parliament; or
 (b) if circumstances arise that, if he were not Speaker, would
 disqualify him to be elected as such; or
 (c) if the National Assembly so resolves, by resolution supported
 by the votes of not less than seventy-five per cent of all its
 members (excluding the ex officio members).
 (3) No business shall be transacted in the National Assembly
 (other than an election of the Speaker) at any time when the office of
 Speaker is vacant, but this subsection shall not prevent the transaction
 of business by a committee of the Assembly.
 (4) The Speaker shall be an ex officio member of the National
 Assembly, whether or not he is elected from among the members of
 the Assembly.
 38. (1) There shall be a Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly,
 who shall be elected by the Assembly, in accordance with its standing Deputy Speaker of
 ngNational Assembly.
 orders, from among persons who are members of the Assembly other
 than the President, the Vice-President, Ministers, Assistant Ministers
 and the Attorney-General.
 (2) The National Assembly shall elect a Deputy Speaker-
 (a) subject to section 37 (3), when it first meets after a dissolution
 of Parliament; and
 (b) when it first meets after the office of Deputy Speaker has
 become vacant otherwise than by reason of the dissolution
 of Parliament,
 or as soon thereafter as may be convenient.
 (3) The Deputy Speaker shall vacate his office -
 (a) when the National Assembly first meets after a dissolution
 of Parliament; or
 (b) if he is elected as President or becomes the Vice-President,
 or a Minister or an Assistant Minister; or
 
 (c) if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 otherwise than by reason of the dissolution of Parliament;
 or
 (d) if the National Assembly so resolves, by resolution supported
 by the votes of not less than seventy-five per cent of all its
 members (excluding the ex officio members).
 Vacation of seat in  39. (1) A member of the National Assembly shall vacate his seat
 National Assembly  if
 7 of 1982. s. 6,
 12 of 1991. s. 5  (a) he has ceased to be a citizen of Kenya;
 (b) (Deleted 12 of 1991, s. 5).
 (c) circumstance arise that, if he were not a member of the
 Assembly, would cause him to be disqualified by section 35
 (1) or by any law made in pursuance of section 35 (3) or (4)
 to be elected as a member; or
 (d) without having obtained the permission of the Speaker, he
 has failed to attend the Assembly on eight consecutive days
 on which the Assembly was sitting in any session:
 Provided that the President may in any case if he thinks fit
 direct that a member shall not vacate his seat by reason of
 his failure so to attend the Assembly.
 (2) An elected member or a nominated member of the National
 Assembly shall vacate his seat as such if he is elected as Speaker.
 (3) In order to permit a member of the National Assembly
 who has been sentenced to death or imprisonment, adjudged to be of
 unsound mind, adjudged bankrupt or convicted or reported guilty of an
 offence prescribed under section 35 (4) to appeal against the decision in
 accordance with the law, Parliament may provide that, subject to such
 conditions as it may prescribe, the decision shall not have effect for the
 purposes of this section until such time as it may prescribe.
 (4) This section shall not apply to the Attorney-General.
 Vacation of seat in
 National Assembly    40. A member of the National Assembly who, having stood at his
 upon resignation  election as an elected member with the support of or as a supporter of a
 from party. 12 of  political party, or having accepted appointment as a nominated member
 1991 s.6.      as a supporter of a political party, either-
 (a) resigns from that party at a time when that party is a
 parliamentary party; or
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (b) having, after the dissolution of that party, been a member of
 another parliamentary party, resigns from that other party at
 a time when that other party is a parliamentary party,
 shall vacate his seat forthwith unless in the meantime that party
 of which he was last a member has ceased to exist as a parliamentary
 party or he has resigned his seat:
 Provided that this subsection shall not apply to any member who
 is elected as Speaker.
 41. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission, which shall Electoral
 consist of a chairman and not less than four and not more than twenty- Commission.
 one members appointed by the President.                    9 of 1997, s. 6.
 (IA) Every member of the Commission shall be a citizen of
 Kenya.
 (2) The Commission shall elect a vice-chairman from among its
 members.
 (2A) The chairman and the vice-chairman of the Commission
 shall be persons who have held or are qualified to hold office of judge
 of the High Court or judge of appeal under this Constitution.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed a member of
 the Commission if he is a member of the National Assembly or if he
 holds or is acting in any office in the public service or in the armed
 forces of the Republic.
 (4) Subject to this section, the office of a member of the
 Commission shall become vacant -
 (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his
 appointment; or
 (b) if circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of
 the Commission, would cause him to be disqualified to be
 appointed as such.
 (5) A member of the Commission may be removed from office
 only for inability to exercise the functions of his office (whether
 arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for
 misbehavior, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with
 this section.
 
 (6) A member of the Commission shall be removed from office
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 by the President if the question of his removal from office has been
 referred to a tribunal appointed under subsection (7) and the tribunal
 has recommended to the President that he ought to be removed from
 office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehavior.
 (7) If the President considers that the question of removing a
 member of the Commission under this section ought to be investigated,
 then -
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal, which shall consist of
 a chairman and four other members selected by the President
 from among persons -
 (i) who hold or have held the office of judge of the High
 Court or judge of appeal; or
 (ii) who are qualified to be appointed as judges of the High
 Court under section 61 (3); or
 (iii) upon whom the President has conferred the rank of
 Cap. 16.              Senior Counsel under section 17 of the Advocates Act;
 and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the
 facts thereof to the President and recommend to him whether
 the member ought to be removed.
 (8) If the question of removing a member of the Commission
 has been referred to a tribunal under this section, the President may
 suspend that member from the exercise of the functions of his office,
 and any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President,
 and shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends
 to the President that that member should not be removed.
 (9) In the exercise of its functions under this Constitution the
 Commission shall not be subject to the direction of any other person
 or authority.
 (10) Subject to this Constitution and without prejudice to
 subsection (9), Parliament may provide for the orderly and effective
 conduct of the operations and business of the Commission and for the
 powers of the Commission to appoint staff and establish committees
 and regulate their procedure.
 (11) The Commission may, subject to its rules of procedure,
 act notwithstanding a vacancy in its membership or the absence of a
 member, and its proceedings shall not be invalidated by the presence
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 or participation of a person not entitled to be present at or to participate
 in those proceedings:
 Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the
 concurrence of a majority of all its members.
 42. (1) Subject to this section, Kenya shall be divided into such Constituencies.
 number of constituencies having such boundaries and names as may be  14 of 1986, s.3,
 prescribed by order made by the Electoral Commission.         10 of 1991, s. 2.
 (2) Parliament may prescribe the minimum number of
 constituencies into which Kenya shall be divided (which shall not be
 less than 188) or the maximum number of constituencies (which shall
 exceed the minimum number by at least twenty), and until Parliament
 has so prescribed the minimum number of constituencies shall be 188
 and the maximum shall be 210.
 (3) All constituencies shall contain as nearly equal numbers of
 inhabitants as appears to the Commission to be reasonably practicable,
 but the Commission may depart from this principle to the extent that it
 considers expedient in order to take account of -
 (a) the density of population, and in particular the need to ensure
 adequate representation of urban and sparsely-populated
 rural areas;
 (b) population trends;
 (c) the means of communication;
 (d) geographical features;
 (e) community of interest; and
 (f) the boundaries of existing administrative areas, and, for the
 purposes of this subsection, the number of inhabitants of any
 part of Kenya shall be ascertained by reference to the latest
 census of the population held in pursuance of any law.
 (4) At intervals of not less than eight and not more than ten years,
 and whenever directed by Act of Parliament, the Commission shall
 review the number, the boundaries and the names of the constituencies
 into which Kenya is divided, and may, by order, alter the number, the
 boundaries or the names, subject to and in accordance with this section,
 to the extent that it considers desirable in the light of the review.
 
 (5) Whenever a census of the population has been held in
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Conduct of elections.
 6 of 1992, s. 8,
 9 of 1997, s. 7.
 
 Qualifications and
 disqualifications
 for registration as a
 voter.
 2 of 1974. s. 2.
 
 pursuance of any law, or whenever a variation has been made in the
 boundary of an existing administrative area, the Commission may carry
 out a review and make an alteration to the extent which it considers
 desirable in consequence of that census or variation.
 (6) Every order made by the Commission under this section shall
 be published in the Kenya Gazette and shall come into effect upon the
 next dissolution of Parliament after it is made.
 42A. The Electoral Commission shall be responsible for -
 (a) the registration of voters and the maintenance and revision
 of the register of voters;
 (b) directing and supervising the Presidential, National
 Assembly and local government elections;
 (c) promoting free and fair elections;
 (d) promoting voter education throughout Kenya; and
 (e) such other functions as may be prescribed by law.
 43. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a person shall be qualified to
 be registered as a voter in elections to the National Assembly and in
 elections of a President if, and shall not be qualified unless, at the date
 of his application to be registered, he -
 (a) is a citizen of Kenya who has attained the age of eighteen
 years; and
 (b) has been ordinarily resident in Kenya either -
 (i) for a period of not less than one year immediately
 preceding that date; or
 (ii) for a period of, or periods amounting in the aggregate to,
 not less than four years in the eight years immediately
 preceding that date; and
 (c) has, for a period of, or periods amounting in the aggregate
 to, not less than five months in the twelve months
 immediately preceding that date, been ordinarily resident
 in the constituency in which he applies to be registered, or
 has for such a period or periods carried on business there,
 or has for such a period or periods been employed there or
 has for such a period or periods lawfully possessed land or
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 residential buildings there.
 (2) No person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter in
 elections to which this section applies -
 (a) if, under any law in force in Kenya, he is adjudged or
 otherwise declared to be of unsound mind; or
 (b) if he is an undischarged bankrupt, having been adjudged
 or otherwise declared bankrupt under a law in force in
 Kenya; or
 (c) if he is detained in lawful custody; or
 (d) if he is disqualified therefrom by Act of Parliament on
 the grounds of his having been convicted of an offence
 connected with elections or on the grounds of his having
 been reported guilty of the offence by the court trying an
 election petition.
 (3) A question whether a person is qualified to be registered as a
 voter in elections to which this section applies shall be determined in
 such manner as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (4) Where a person is qualified to be registered in more than one
 place as a voter in elections to which this section applies, he shall be
 so registered only in the first of those places in which he applies to
 be so registered, and Parliament may provide for the punishment of
 a person who, being already registered in one place as a voter in the
 elections or having applied to be so registered there and not having
 had that application finally rejected, applies to be registered in another
 place as a voter.
 (5) Parliament may, in order to permit a person who has been
 adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind, adjudged or declared
 bankrupt or convicted of an offence referred to in subsection (2) (d) to
 appeal against the decision in accordance with any law, provided that,
 subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by Parliament, the
 decision shall not have effect for the purposes of subsection (2) until
 such time as may be so prescribed.
 Determination of
 44. (1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and questions as to
 determine any question whether membership of National Assembly.
 (a) a person has been validly elected as a member of the National  7 of 1984, s.2,
 Assembly; or                                             9 of 1997, s. 8.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (b) the seat in the National Assembly of a member thereof has
 become vacant.
 (2) An application to the High Court for the determination of a
 question under subsection (1) (a) may be made by any person who was
 entitled to vote in the election to which the application relates, or by
 the Attorney-General.
 (3) An application to the High Court for the determination of a
 question under subsection (1) (b) may be made -
 (a) where the Speaker has declared that the seat in the National
 Assembly of a member has by reason of a provision of this
 Constitution become vacant, by that member; or
 (b) in any other case, by a person who is registered as a voter
 in elections of elected members of the Assembly, or by the
 Attorney-General.
 (4) Parliament may make provision with respect to -
 (a) the circumstances and manner in which, the time within
 which and the conditions upon which an application may be
 made to the High Court for the determination of a question
 under this section; and
 (b) the powers, practice and procedure of the High Court in
 relation to the application.
 (5) (Repealed by 9 of 1997, s. 8).
 45. (Repealed by 3 of 1999, s. 2).
 PART IA
 The Parliamentary Service and the Parliamentary
 Service Commission
 Parliamentary       45A. (1) There shall be a service to be known as the parliamentary
 Service.       service.
 (2) There shall be a Clerk of the National Assembly and such other
 officers and staff as may be appointed for the purposes of the National
 Assembly in accordance with section 45B.
 (3) The offices of the Clerk of the National Assembly and the
 officers and other staff provided for under subsection (2) shall be offices
 in the parliamentary service.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Parliamentary
 45B. (1) There shall be a Parliamentary Service Commission Service Commission.
 which shall consist of -
 (a) the speaker of the National Assembly who shall be the
 chairman;
 (b) a vice-chairman elected by the Commission from amongst
 the members appointed under paragraph (e) of this
 subsection;
 (c) the leader of Government business in the National Assembly
 or a member of the Assembly deputed by him;
 (d) the leader of the opposition party with the highest number of
 seats in the National Assembly or a member of the Assembly
 deputed by him;
 (e) seven members (other than the President, Ministers,
 Assistant Ministers and the Attorney-General) appointed
 by the National Assembly from amongst its members, of
 whom -
 (i) four shall be nominated by the parliamentary party or parties
 forming the Government; and
 (ii) three shall be nominated by the parliamentary party or
 parties forming the opposition.
 (2) A member of the Commission shall vacate office-
 (a) upon dissolution of the Parliament during which the member
 was appointed to the Commission:
 Provided that upon dissolution of Parliament, appointed
 members of the Commission shall continue in office until
 new members are appointed in their place by the next
 National Assembly;
 (b) if he ceases to be a member of the National Assembly
 otherwise than by reason of the dissolution of Parliament;
 (c) if circumstances arise that, if he were not a member of the
 Assembly, would disqualify him for election as such;
 (d) if he is an appointed member, upon revocation of his
 appointment by the Assembly or upon his resignation; or
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (e) if he is the Speaker or the leader of Government business,
 or the leader of the opposition party with the highest number
 of seats in the National Assembly, upon ceasing to hold
 office as such.
 (3) If the office of chairman of the Commission is vacant or
 the chairman is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his
 office, then, until a person has been elected Speaker and has assumed
 the functions of chairman, or until the person holding that office has
 resumed those functions, as the case may be, the vice-chairman or, if
 the office of the vice-chairman is vacant, or the vice-chairman is for
 any reason unable to perform the functions of the office of chairman,
 such one of the other appointed members as the Commission may elect
 shall act as chairman; and the vice-chairman or the other member shall,
 subject to subsection (2), continue to act until a person has been elected
 to the office of Speaker and assumed the functions of chairman or, as the
 case may be, until the person in whose place he is acting has assumed
 or resumed those functions.
 (4) If the office of an appointed member of the Commission is
 vacant or if such member is acting as chairman under subsection (3),
 or is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office, the
 Assembly may appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed to be
 a member to act in place of that member; and a person so appointed
 shall, subject to subsection (2), continue to act until a person has been
 appointed to the office in which he is acting or has assumed the functions
 of that office, as the case may be, until the person in whose place he is
 acting has resumed those functions.
 (5) The Parliamentary Service Commission shall have power -
 (a) to constitute and abolish offices in the parliamentary
 service;
 (b) to appoint persons to hold or act in the offices of the Service
 (including the power to confirm appointments) and to
 exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting
 in those offices (including the power to remove those persons
 from office);
 (c) to provide such services and facilities as are necessary to
 ensure efficient and effective functioning of the Assembly;
 (d) to direct and supervise the administration of the services
 and facilities provided by, and exercise budgetary control
 over, the Service;
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (e) in such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act
 of Parliament -
 (i) to cause to be prepared and laid before the National
 Assembly in each financial year estimates of expenditure
 (which shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund) of
 the parliamentary service for the next following financial
 year;
 (ii) to cause to be audited and a report thereon laid before the
 Assembly at least once every year, the accounts of the
 Commission (also known as the accounts of the Clerk
 of the National Assembly) provided that until such time
 as the manner of the audit and report is prescribed as
 aforesaid section 105 shall continue to apply mutatis
 mutandis;
 (f) without prejudice to the generality of paragraphs (c) and
 (d), to provide security staff to maintain proper security for
 members of the Assembly and for the services and facilities
 within the precincts of the Assembly;
 (g) to determine the terms and conditions of service of persons
 holding or acting in the offices of the Service;
 (h) from time to time as necessity arises, to appoint an
 independent body to review and make recommendations
 on the salaries and allowances of the members of the
 Assembly;
 (i) to initiate, co-ordinate and harmonize policies and strategies
 relating to the development of the Service;
 (j) to undertake, singly or jointly with other relevant authorities
 and organisations, such programmes as will promote the
 ideals of parliamentary democracy in Kenya.
 (k) to do such other things including review of parliamentary
 powers and privileges as may be necessary for the well-being
 of the members and staff of the National Assembly and to
 exercise such other functions as may be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament.
 (6) In the exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions
 under this Constitution, the Commission shall not be subject to the
 direction or control of any other person or authority.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (7) Subject to this section, the Commission may by regulations
 or otherwise regulate its own procedure and, with the consent of the
 President or the Public Service Commission, as may be appropriate,
 may confer powers or impose duties on any public officer or authority
 for the purpose of the discharge of its functions.
 (8) Subject to any regulations made under subsection (7), the
 Commission may act notwithstanding a vacancy in its membership or
 absence of a member, and its proceedings shall not be invalidated by
 the presence or participation of a person not entitled to be present at or
 to participate in those proceedings.
 (9) The Commission shall endeavour to reach every decision by
 consensus:
 Provided that where on any matter consensus cannot be obtained,
 the decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a
 majority of all the members thereof.
 (10) The Commission may, by directions in writing, delegate any
 of its powers under this section to any one or more of its members or
 to any officer in the parliamentary service.
 (11) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary appearing in this
 section, the Commission may -
 (a) engage persons under individual contracts of service
 upon such terms and conditions as the Commission may
 determine;
 (b) commission any person, who in its opinion possesses expert
 knowledge or is otherwise able to assist in connection with
 the exercise of its functions, to make such inquiries or to
 conduct such research or to make such reports as may be
 necessary for the efficient and effective carrying out of its
 functions;
 (c) appoint competent persons, whether members of the
 Commission or not, to be a committee or committees to
 assist the Commission on such matters within the scope of
 its functions as are referred to them by the Commission.
 (12) Subject to this section, provision may be made by or under
 an Act of Parliament for prescribing the manner of the exercise of the
 functions of the Commission under this section and for any matters
 incidental or supplementary to the exercise of those functions.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (13) For the avoidance of doubt and without prejudice to the
 generality of subsection (14), section 48 and section 107(1) shall not
 apply in relation to the parliamentary service.
 (14) This Part shall have effect notwithstanding any other
 provision of this Constitution and, accordingly, if any such provision
 is inconsistent with a provision of this Part, the provision of this Part
 shall apply.
 PART 2
 Legislation and Procedure in the National Assembly
 46. (1) Subject to this Constitution, the legislative power of Exercise of
 legislative
 Parliament shall be exercisable by Bills passed by the National leslie
 power of Parliament.
 Assembly.                                                     6 of 1992, s. 9.
 (2) When a Bill has been passed by the National Assembly, it
 shall be presented to the President for his assent.
 (3) The President shall, within twenty-one days after the Bill has
 been presented to him for assent under subsection (2), signify to the
 Speaker that he assents to the Bill or refuses to assent to the Bill.
 (4) Where the President refuses to assent to a Bill he shall,
 within fourteen days of the refusal, submit a memorandum to the
 Speaker indicating the specific provisions of the Bill which in his
 opinion should be reconsidered by the National Assembly including
 his recommendation for amendments.
 (5) The National Assembly shall reconsider a Bill referred to it
 by the President taking into account the comments of the President
 and shall either-
 (a) approve the recommendations proposed by the President
 with or without amendment and resubmit the Bill to the
 President for assent; or
 (b) refuse to accept the recommendations and approve the Bill
 in its original form by a resolution in that behalf supported by
 votes of not less than sixty-five per cent of all the Members
 of the National Assembly (excluding ex officio members)
 in which case the President shall assent to the Bill within
 fourteen days of the passing of the resolution.
 (6) A law made by Parliament shall not come into operation until it
 has been published in the Kenya Gazette, but Parliament may postpone
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 the coming into operation of a law and, subject to section 77, may make
 laws with retrospective effect.
 (7) A law made by Parliament shall be styled anAct of Parliament,
 and the words of enactment shall be "Enacted by the Parliament of
 Kenya".
 Alteration of        47. (1) Subject to this section, Parliament may alter this
 Constitution.  Constitution.
 (2) A Bill for an Act of Parliament to alter this Constitution shall
 not be passed by the National Assembly unless it has been supported
 on the second and third readings by the votes of not less than sixty-five
 per cent of all the members of the Assembly (excluding the ex officio
 members).
 (3) If, on the taking of a vote for the purposes of subsection (2),
 the Bill is supported by a majority of the members of the Assembly
 voting but not by the number of votes required by that subsection, and
 the Bill is not opposed by thirty-five per cent of all the members of the
 Assembly or more, then, subject to such limitations and conditions as
 may be prescribed by the standing orders of the Assembly, a further
 vote may be taken.
 (4) When a Bill for anAct of Parliament to alter this Constitution
 has been introduced into the National Assembly, no alterations shall be
 made in it before it is presented to the President for his assent, except
 alterations which are certified by the Speaker to be necessary because
 of the time that has elapsed since the Bill was first introduced into the
 Assembly.
 (5) A certificate of the Speaker under subsection (4) shall be
 conclusive as regards proceedings in the Assembly, and shall not be
 questioned in any court.
 (6) In this section -
 (a) references to this Constitution are references to this
 Constitution as from time to time amended; and
 (b) references to the alteration of this Constitution are references
 to the amendment, modification or reenactment, with or
 without amendment or modification, of any provision of
 this Constitution, the suspension or repeal of that provision
 and the making of a different provision in the place of that
 provision.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 48. Except upon the recommendation of the President signified
 by a Minister, the National Assembly shall not -
 (a) proceed upon a Bill (including an amendment to a Bill) that,
 in the opinion of the person presiding, makes provision for
 any of the following purposes -
 (i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation
 otherwise than by reduction; or
 (ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund
 or any other fund of the Government of Kenya or the
 alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction;
 or
 (iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated
 Fund or any other fund of the Government of Kenya of
 moneys not charged upon the fund or an increase in the
 amount of the payment, issue or withdrawal; or
 (iv) the composition or remission of a debt due to the
 Government of Kenya; or
 (b) proceed upon a motion (including an amendment to a
 motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the person
 presiding, would be to make provision for any of those
 purposes.
 49. (1) Every member of the National Assembly shall, before
 taking his seat in the Assembly, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance
 before the Assembly, but a member may before taking and subscribing
 that oath take part in the election of the Speaker of the Assembly.
 (2) A person elected as Speaker of the National Assembly who
 has not before his election as Speaker taken the oath as a member of
 the Assembly shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take
 and subscribe the oath of allegiance before the Assembly.
 50. There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly-
 (a) the Speaker; or
 (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or
 (c) in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker,
 such member of the Assembly (not being the President, the
 Vice-President, a Minister or an Assistant Minister) as the
 
 Restrictions with
 regard to certain
 financial measures.
 
 Oaths to be taken by
 members of National
 Assembly.
 
 Presiding in National
 Assembly.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Assembly may elect for that purpose.
 
 Quorum in National
 Assembly.
 Powers of President
 in Parliament.
 
 Official
 languages. I of 1975,
 s. 3, 1 of 1979, s. 3.
 
 Voting in
 National Assembly.
 
 51. If any member of the National Assembly who is present takes
 objection that less than thirty members of the Assembly (besides the
 person presiding) are present in the Assembly and, after such interval
 as may be prescribed in the standing orders of the Assembly, the person
 presiding ascertains that there are still less than thirty members of the
 Assembly present, the person presiding shall thereupon adjourn the
 Assembly.
 52. The President shall be entitled -
 (a) in the exercise of his functions as Head of State, to address
 the National Assembly at any time he thinks fit to do so;
 and
 (b) in the exercise of his functions as Head of the Government
 and as a member of the National Assembly, to attend all
 meetings of the Assembly and to take part in all proceedings
 thereof, and to vote on any question before the Assembly.
 53. (1) Subject to this section, the official languages of the
 National Assembly shall be Swahili and English and the business of the
 National Assembly may be conducted in either or both languages.
 (2) Every Bill (including the memorandum accompanying a Bill),
 every Act of Parliament whenever enacted, all other actual or proposed
 legislation under the authority of an Act of Parliament, all financial
 resolutions and documents relating thereto, and every actual or proposed
 amendment of any of the foregoing, shall be written in English.
 (3) In all proceedings of the National Assembly which involve
 the discussion of any of the following matters, that is to say, a Bill (
 including the memorandum accompanying a Bill), anAct of Parliament,
 other legislation whether actual or proposed, a financial resolution or
 document relating thereto, or an actual or proposed amendment thereof,
 the wording of the matter shall, as occasion requires, be quoted in
 English.
 54. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any
 question proposed for decision in the National Assembly shall be
 determined by a majority of the votes of the members present and
 voting.
 (2) On a question proposed for decision in the National Assembly,
 the person presiding in the Assembly shall -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (a) if he is the Speaker, have a casting vote but not an original
 vote; or
 (b) if he is not the Speaker, have both an original vote and a
 casting vote.
 (3) The standing orders of the National Assembly may make
 provision under which a member who votes upon a question in which
 he has a direct pecuniary interest shall be deemed not to have voted.
 55. A person who sits or votes in the National Assembly knowing
 or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not entitled to do
 so shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five hundred shillings, or
 such other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament, for each day on
 which he so sits or votes, and that penalty shall be recoverable by action
 in the High Court at the suit of the Attorney-General.
 56. (1) Subject to this Constitution, the National Assembly
 may-
 (a) make standing orders regulating the procedure of the
 Assembly (including in particular orders for the orderly
 conduct of proceedings);
 (b) subject to standing orders made under paragraph (a),
 establish committees in such manner and for such general or
 special purposes as it thinks fit, and regulate the procedure
 of any committee so established.
 (2) Subject to this Constitution, the National Assembly may act
 notwithstanding a vacancy in its membership (including a vacancy not
 filled when the Assembly first meets after a general election), and the
 presence or participation of a person not entitled to be present at or
 to participate in the proceedings of the Assembly shall not invalidate
 those proceedings.
 57. Without prejudice to the powers conferred by section 56,
 Parliament may, for the purpose of the orderly and effective discharge of
 the business of the National Assembly, provide for the powers, privileges
 and immunities of the Assembly and its committees and members.
 PART 3
 Summoning Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliament
 58. (1) Subject to this section, each session of Parliament shall
 be held at such place within Kenya and shall commence at such time
 as the President may appoint.
 
 Unqualified persons
 sitting or voting.
 Regulation of
 Procedure in National
 Assembly.
 
 Powers. privileges
 and immunities of
 National Assembly.
 
 Summoning of
 Parliament.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (2) There shall be a session of Parliament at least once in every
 year, so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the
 last sitting of the National Assembly in one session and the first sitting
 thereof in the next session.
 (3) Whenever Parliament is dissolved, a general election of
 members of the National Assembly shall be held, and the first session
 of the new Parliament shall commence within three months after that
 dissolution.
 (4) Subject to this section, the sittings of the National Assembly
 in a session of Parliament shall be held at such time and on such days
 as may be determined in accordance with the standing orders of the
 Assembly.
 Prorogation and
 dissolution of       59. (1) The President may at any time prorogue Parliament.
 Parliament.
 (2) The President may at any time dissolve Parliament.
 (3) If the National Assembly passes a resolution which is
 supported by the votes of a majority of all the members of the Assembly
 (excluding the ex officio members), and of which not less than seven
 days' notice has been given in accordance with the standing orders of
 the Assembly, declaring that it has no confidence in the Government
 of Kenya, and the President does not within three days of the passing
 of that resolution either resign from his office or dissolve Parliament,
 Parliament shall stand dissolved on the fourth day following the day
 on which that resolution was passed.
 (4) Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five
 years from the date when the National Assembly first meets after
 dissolution and shall then stand dissolved.
 (5) At any time when Kenya is at war, Parliament may from time
 to time provide for the extension of the period of five years specified in
 subsection (4) for not more than twelve months at a time:
 Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under
 this subsection by more than five years.
 CHAPTER IV
 THE JUDICATURE
 PART 1
 The High Court and the Court of Appeal
 Establishment of
 High Court.          60. (1) There shall be a High Court, which shall be a superior court
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 of record, and which shall have unlimited original jurisdiction in civil
 and criminal matters and such otherjurisdiction and powers as may be
 conferred on it by this Constitution or any other law.
 (2) The judges of the High Court shall be the Chief Justice and
 such number, not being less than eleven, of other judges (hereinafter
 referred to as puisne judges) as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (3) The High Court shall be duly constituted notwithstanding a
 vacancy in the office of a judge of that Court.
 (4) The office of a puisne judge shall not be abolished while there
 is a substantive holder thereof.
 (5) The High Court shall sit at such places as the Chief Justice
 may appoint.
 Appointment of
 61. (1) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the President.  judges of High Court.
 4 of 1988, s.2,
 (2) The puisne judges shall be appointed by the President acting  17 of 1990, s. 3.
 in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed ajudge of the
 High Court unless -
 (a) he is, or has been, a judge of a court having unlimited
 jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of
 the Commonwealth or in the Republic of Ireland or a court
 having jurisdiction in appeals from such a court; or
 (b) he is an advocate of the High Court of Kenya of not less
 than seven years standing; or
 (c) he holds, and has held for a period of, or for periods
 amounting in the aggregate to, not less than seven years, one
 or other of the qualifications specified in paragraphs (a), (b),
 (c) and (d) of section 12 (1) of the Advocates Act as in force  Cap. 16 (1986).
 on 121h December, 1963.
 (4) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant, or if the Chief Justice
 is for any reason unable to discharge the functions of his office, the
 President may appoint a puisne judge to act as Chief Justice, and a
 puisne judge so appointed shall exercise the functions of that office
 until a person is appointed to and assumes the functions of that office,
 or until the Chief Justice resumes those functions, as the case may be,
 or until his appointment is sooner revoked by the President.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (5) If the office of a puisne judge is vacant or if a puisne judge is
 appointed to act as Chief Justice or is for any reason unable to discharge
 the functions of his office, or if the Chief Justice advises the President
 that the state of business in the High Court so requires, the President,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission,
 may appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a judge of the
 High Court to act as a puisne judge; and a person may act as a puisne
 judge notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for the
 purposes of section 62 (1).
 (6) A person appointed under subsection (5) to act as a puisne
 judge shall, subject to subsections (4) and (7) of section 62, continue to
 act for the period of his appointment or, if no period is specified, until
 his appointment is revoked by the President, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, and may continue to
 act thereafter for so long as may be necessary to enable him to deliver
 judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that have
 already been commenced before him.
 Tenure of office of  62. (1) Subject to this section, a judge of the High Court shall
 judges of High Court. vacate his office when he attains such age as may be prescribed by
 4 of 1988. s. 3, 17 of  Parliament.
 1990. s. 4.
 (2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age prescribed for
 the purposes of subsection (1), a judge of the High Court may continue
 in office for so long after attaining that age as may be necessary to
 enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to
 proceedings that were commenced before him before he attained that
 age.
 (3) A judge of the High Court may be removed from office only
 for inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising from
 infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for misbehaviour,
 and shall not be removed except in accordance with this section.
 (4) Ajudge of the High Court shall be removed from office by the
 President if the question of his removal has been referred to a tribunal
 appointed under subsection (5) and the tribunal has recommended to the
 President that the judge ought to be removed from office for inability
 as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.
 (5) If the Chief Justice represents to the President that the question
 of removing a puisne judge under this section ought to be investigated,
 then -
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of
 a chairman and four other members selected by the President
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 from among persons -
 (i) who hold or have held the office of judge of the High
 Court or judge of appeal; or
 (ii) who are qualified to be appointed as judges of the High
 Court under section 61 (3); or
 (iii) upon whom the President has conferred the rank of
 Senior Counsel under section 17 of the Advocates Act;  Cap. 16.
 and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the
 facts thereof to the President and recommend to the President
 whether that judge ought to be removed under this section.
 (6) Where the question of removing a judge from office has
 been referred to a tribunal under this section, the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Chief Justice, may suspend the judge
 from exercising the functions of his office and any such suspension may
 at any time be revoked by the President, acting in accordance with the
 advice of Chief Justice, and shall in any case cease to have effect if
 the tribunal recommend to the President that the judge ought not to be
 removed from office.
 (7) Where the question arises as whether the Chief Justice has
 become unable by reason of physical or mental infirmity to exercise
 the functions of his office or that his conduct ought to be investigated,
 then the President shall appoint a tribunal consisting of five members
 appointed by him in the manner provided under subsection (8).
 (8) The tribunal appointed under subsection (7) shall consist of
 the following members -
 (a) a person who holds or has held the office of Speaker of the
 National Assembly who shall be the chairman;
 (b) two persons who hold or have held office as judges of
 appeal;
 (c) one person upon whom the rank of Senior Counsel has
 been conferred by the President under section 17 of the  Cap. 16.
 Advocates Act; and
 (d) the chairman of the Public Service Commission.
 (9) When the question of removing the Chief Justice has been
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 referred to a tribunal under this section he shall not exercise any of the
 functions of his office pending the decision of the tribunal; but he will
 resume those functions if the tribunal recommends to the President that
 the Chief Justice ought not be removed from office.
 Oaths to be taken by  63. A judge of the High Court shall not enter upon the duties of
 judges of High Court. his office until he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and
 such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by
 Parliament.
 Establishment of     64. (1) There shall be a Court of Appeal which shall be a superior
 Court of Appeal.  court of record, and which shall have such jurisdiction and powers in
 13 of 1977. s. 2, 7 of  relation to appeals from the High Court as may be conferred on it by
 1984 s.3.       law.
 (2) The judges of the Court of Appeal shall be the Chief Justice and
 such number, not being less than two, of other judges (herein referred
 to as judges of appeal) as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (3) The foregoing provisions of this Part shall apply in respect of
 the judges of appeal as they apply to puisne judges.
 (4) Where a puisne judge has been appointed as ajudge of appeal
 he may continue to exercise the functions of a puisne judge to enable
 him to complete proceedings in the High Court that were commenced
 before him prior to his being so appointed.
 PART 2
 Other Courts
 Establishment of     65. (1) Parliament may establish courts subordinate to the High
 other courts.   Court and courts-martial, and a court so established shall, subject to this
 Constitution, have such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred
 on it by any law.
 (2) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to supervise any civil
 or criminal proceedings before a subordinate court or court-martial,
 and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions
 as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of ensuring that justice
 is duly administered by those courts.
 (3) The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice
 and procedure of the High Court in relation to thejurisdiction and powers
 conferred on it by subsection (2).
 Kadhis' courts.      66. (1) There shall be a Chief Kadhi and such number, not being
 less than three, of other Kadhis as may be prescribed by or under an
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Act of Parliament.
 (2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed to hold or act
 in the office of Kadhi unless -
 (a) he professes the Muslim religion; and
 (b) he possesses such knowledge of the Muslim law applicable
 to any sect or sects of Muslims as qualifies him, in the
 opinion of the Judicial Service Commission, to hold a
 Kadhi's court.
 (3) Without prejudice to section 65 (1), there shall be such
 subordinate courts held by Kadhis as Parliament may establish and each
 Kadhi's court shall, subject to this Constitution, have such jurisdiction
 and powers as may be conferred on it by any law.
 (4) The Chief Kadhi and the other Kadhis, or the Chief Kadhi
 and such of the other Kadhis (not being less than three in number)
 as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, shall each
 be empowered to hold a Kadhi's court having jurisdiction within the
 former Protectorate or within such part of the former Protectorate as
 may be so prescribed:
 Provided that no part of the former Protectorate shall be outside
 the jurisdiction of some Kadhi's court.
 (5) The jurisdiction of a Kadhi's court shall extend to the
 determination of questions of Muslim law relating to personal status,
 marriage, divorce or inheritance in proceedings in which all the parties
 profess the Muslim religion.
 References
 67. (1) Where a question as to the interpretation of this Constitution and appeals on
 arises in proceedings in a subordinate court and the court is of the opinion  interpretation of
 that the question involves a substantial question of law, the court may, Constitution.
 and shall if a party to the proceedings so requests, refer the question
 to the High Court.
 (2) Where a question is referred to the High Court in pursuance of
 subsection (1), the High Court shall give its decision upon the question
 and the court in which the question arose shall dispose of the case in
 accordance with that decision.
 (3) When the High Court is determining a matter in connexion
 with a reference to it under subsection (1) (other than an interlocutory
 matter) it shall be composed of an uneven number ofjudges, not being
 less than three.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (4) Where a subordinate court or a court-martial has given a
 final decision in civil or criminal proceedings on a question as to the
 interpretation of this Constitution, and the question has not already
 been referred to the High Court under subsection (1) of this section or
 under section 84 (3), an appeal shall lie against that decision as of right
 to the High Court, either -
 (a) direct; or
 (b) if-
 (i) an appeal lies as of right from the decision to another
 subordinate court or court-martial; or
 (ii) an appeal lies from the decision to another subordinate
 court or court-martial with the leave of the court that
 gave the decision or of some other court, and that leave
 has not been withheld,
 by way of that other subordinate court or court-martial.
 PART 3
 The Judicial Service Commission
 Judicial Service
 Commission.          68. (1) There shall be a Judicial Service Commission which shall
 consist of -
 (a) the Chief Justice as chairman;
 (b) the Attorney-General;
 (c) two persons who are for the time being designated by the
 President from among the puisne judges of the High Court
 and the judges of the Court of Appeal; and
 (d) the chairman of the Public Service Commission.
 (2) In the exercise of its functions under this Constitution, the
 Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other
 person or authority.
 (3) Subject to this Chapter, the Commission may make regulations
 regulating its own procedure and, with the consent of the President, may
 confer powers or impose duties on any public officer or authority for
 the purpose of the discharge of its functions.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (4) Subject to any regulations made under subsection (3), the
 Commission may act notwithstanding a vacancy in its membership or
 the absence of a member, and its proceedings shall not be invalidated
 by the presence or participation of a person not entitled to be present
 at or to participate in those proceedings:
 Provided that a decision of the Commission shall require the
 concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof.
 69. (1) The power to appoint persons to hold or act in an  Appointment. etc., of
 office to which this section applies (including the power to confirm  judicial officers.
 appointments), the power to exercise disciplinary control over persons 4 of 1988, s. 4.
 holding or acting in those offices and the power to remove those persons
 from office shall vest in the Judicial Service Commission.
 (2) The Judicial Service Commission may, by directions in
 writing and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, delegate any of
 its powers under subsection (1) to any one or more of its members or
 to any judge of the High Court or to any person holding or acting in an
 office to which this section applies:
 Provided that a power that relates to an office the holder of which
 is required to possess legal qualifications may not be delegated under
 this subsection except to one or more members of the Commission.
 (3) The offices to which this section applies are -
 (a) the office of Registrar or Deputy Registrar of the High
 Court;
 (b) the office of the Chief Magistrate, the Principal Magistrate,
 the Senior Resident Magistrate, Resident Magistrate or
 District Magistrate;
 (c) the office of any other person empowered to hold or
 be a member of a subordinate court exercising criminal
 jurisdiction;
 (d) the office of Chief Kadhi and Kadhi; and
 (e) such other offices of member of any court or connected with
 any court as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Fundamental rights
 and freedoms of the
 individual.
 
 Protection of right
 to life.
 
 CHAPTER V
 PROTECTION OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND
 FREEDOMS OF THE INDIVIDUAL
 70. Whereas every person in Kenya is entitled to the fundamental
 rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, whatever
 his race, tribe, place of origin or residence or other local connexion,
 political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the
 rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and
 all of the following, namely -
 (a) life, liberty, security of the person and the protection of
 the law;
 (b) freedom of conscience, of expression and of assembly and
 association; and
 (c) protection for the privacy of his home and other property and
 from deprivation of property without compensation,
 the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose
 of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject
 to such limitations of that protection as are contained in
 those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that
 the enjoyment of those rights and freedoms by any individual
 does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the
 public interest.
 71. (1) No person shall be deprived of his life intentionally save
 in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal offence
 under the law of Kenya of which he has been convicted.
 (2) Without prejudice to any liability for a contravention of any
 other law with respect to the use of force in those cases hereinafter
 mentioned, a person shall not be regarded as having been deprived of his
 life in contravention of this section if he dies as the result of the use of
 force to such an extent as is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances
 of the case -
 (a) for the defence of any person from violence or for the
 defence of property;
 (b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of
 a person lawfully detained;
 (c) for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrection or mutiny;
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 or
 (d) in order to prevent the commission by that person of a
 criminal offence,
 or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
 72. (1) No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty save Protection of right to
 as may be authorized by law in any of the following cases -   personal liberty.
 20 of 1987.
 (a) in execution of the sentence or order of a court, whether  4 of 1988, s.5.
 established for Kenya or some other country, in respect of a
 criminal offence of which he has been convicted;
 (b) in execution of the order of the High Court or the Court
 of Appeal punishing him for contempt of that court or of
 another court or tribunal;
 (c) in execution of the order of a court made to secure the
 fulfilment of an obligation imposed on him by law;
 (d) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution
 of the order of a court;
 (e) upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or
 being about to commit, a criminal offence under the law
 of Kenya;
 (f) in the case of a person who has not attained the age of
 eighteen years, for the purpose of his education or welfare;
 (g) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an infectious or
 contagious disease;
 (h) in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably suspected
 to be, of unsound mind, addicted to drugs or alcohol, or
 a vagrant, for the purpose of his care or treatment or the
 protection of the community;
 (i) for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of that
 person into Kenya, or for the purpose of effecting the
 expulsion, extradition or other lawful removal of that person
 from Kenya or for the purpose of restricting that person
 while he is being conveyed through Kenya in the course of
 his extradition or removal as a convicted prisoner from one
 country to another; or
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (j) to such extent as may be necessary in the execution of
 a lawful order requiring that person to remain within a
 specified area within Kenya or prohibiting him from being
 within such an area, or to such extent as may be reasonably
 justifiable for the taking of proceedings against that person
 relating to the making of any such order, or to such extent
 as may be reasonably justifiable for restraining that person
 during a visit that he is permitted to make to a part of Kenya
 in which, in consequence of the order, his presence would
 otherwise be unlawful.
 (2) A person who is arrested or detained shall be informed as
 soon as reasonably practicable, in a language that he understands, of
 the reasons for his arrest or detention.
 (3) A person who is arrested or detained -
 (a) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in execution
 of the order of a court; or
 (b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or being
 about to commit, a criminal offence,
 and who is not released, shall be brought before a court as soon as
 is reasonably practicable, and where he is not brought before a court
 within twenty-four hours of his arrest or from the commencement of his
 detention, or within fourteen days of his arrest or detention where he is
 arrested or detained upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed
 or about to commit an offence punishable by death, the burden of proving
 that the person arrested or detained has been brought before a court as
 soon as is reasonably practicable shall rest upon any person alleging
 that the provisions of this subsection have been complied with.
 (4) Where a person is brought before a court in execution of the
 order of a court in any proceedings or upon suspicion of his having
 committed or being about to commit an offence, he shall not be thereafter
 further held in custody in connexion with those proceedings or that
 offence save upon the order of a court.
 (5) If a person arrested or detained as mentioned in subsection (3)
 (b) is not tried within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any
 further proceedings that may be brought against him, he shall, unless
 he is charged with an offence punishable by death, be released either
 unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular
 such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears
 at a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to trial.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (6) A person who is unlawfully arrested or detained by another
 person shall be entitled to compensation therefor from that other
 person.
 Protection from
 73. (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude.  slaveryian for
 slavery and forced
 labour.
 (2) No person shall be required to perform forced labour.
 (3) For the purposes of this section "forced labour" does not
 include -
 (a) labour required in consequence of the sentence or order of
 a court;
 (b) labour required of a person while he is lawfully detained
 that, though not required in consequence of the sentence or
 order of a court, is reasonably necessary in the interests of
 hygiene or for the maintenance of the place at which he is
 detained;
 (c) labour required of a member of a disciplined force in
 pursuance of his duties as such or, in the case of a person
 who has conscientious objections to service as a member of
 an armed force, labour that that person is required by law to
 perform in place of such service;
 (d) labour required during a period when Kenya is at war or an
 order under section 85 is in force or in the event of any other
 emergency or calamity that threatens the life or well-being of
 the community, to the extent that the requiring of the labour
 is reasonably justifiable, in the circumstances of a situation
 arising or existing during that period or as a result of that
 other emergency or calamity, for the purpose of dealing with
 that situation; or
 (e) labour reasonably required as part of reasonable and normal
 communal or other civic obligations.
 74. (1) No person shall be subject to torture or to inhuman or Protection from
 degrading punishment or other treatment.                       inhuman treatment.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section
 to the extent that the law in question authorizes the infliction of any
 description of punishment that was lawful in Kenya on 1 lI December,
 1963.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Protection from      75. (1) No property of any description shall be compulsorily
 deprivation    taken possession of, and no interest in or right over property of any
 of property.   description shall be compulsorily acquired, except where the following
 13 of 1977. s. 3.  conditions are satisfied -
 (a) the taking of possession or acquisition is necessary in the
 interests of defence, public safety, public order, public
 morality, public health, town and country planning or the
 development or utilization of property so as to promote the
 public benefit; and
 (b) the necessity therefor is such as to afford reasonable
 justification for the causing of hardship that may result to any
 person having an interest in or right over the property; and
 (c) provision is made by a law applicable to that taking of
 possession or acquisition for the prompt payment of full
 compensation.
 (2) Every person having an interest or right in or over property
 which is compulsorily taken possession of or whose interest in or right
 over any property is compulsorily acquired shall have a right of direct
 access to the High Court for -
 (a) the determination of his interest or right, the legality of the
 taking of possession or acquisition of the property, interest
 or right, and the amount of any compensation to which he
 is entitled; and
 (b) the purpose of obtaining prompt payment of that
 compensation:
 Provided that if Parliament so provides in relation to a matter
 referred to in paragraph (a) the right of access shall be by way of appeal
 (exercisable as of right at the instance of the person having the right or
 interest in the property) from a tribunal or authority, other than the High
 Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter.
 (3) The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice
 and procedure of the High Court or any other tribunal or authority in
 relation to the jurisdiction conferred on the High Court by subsection
 (2) or exercisable by the other tribunal or authority for the purposes of
 that subsection (including rules with respect to the time within which
 applications or appeals to the High Court or applications to the other
 tribunal or authority may be brought).
 
 (4) and (5) (Deleted by 13 of 1977, s. 3.)
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (6) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of subsection
 (1) or (2)-
 (a) to the extent that the law in question makes provision for
 the taking of possession or acquisition of property -
 (i) in satisfaction of any tax, duty, rate, cess or other
 impost;
 (ii) by way of penalty for breach of the law, whether under
 civil process or after conviction of a criminal offence
 under the law of Kenya;
 (iii) as an incident of a lease, tenancy, mortgage, charge, bill
 of sale, pledge or contract;
 (iv) in the execution of judgments or orders of a court in
 proceedings for the determination of civil rights or
 obligations;
 (v) in circumstances where it is reasonably necessary so to do
 because the property is in a dangerous state or injurious
 to the health of human beings, animals or plants;
 (vi) in consequence of any law with respect to the limitation
 of actions; or
 (vii) for so long only as may be necessary for the purposes
 of an examination, investigation, trial or inquiry or, in
 the case of land, for the purposes of the carrying out
 thereon of work of soil conservation or the conservation
 of other natural resources or work relating to agricultural
 development or improvement (being work relating to the
 development or improvement that the owner or occupier
 of the land has been required, and has without reasonable
 excuse refused or failed, to carry out),
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be
 reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or
 (b) to the extent that the law in question makes provision for
 the taking of possession or acquisition of -
 
 (i) enemy property;
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (ii) property of a deceased person, a person of unsound mind
 or a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years,
 for the purpose of its administration for the benefit of the
 persons entitled to the beneficial interest therein;
 (iii) property of a person adjudged bankrupt or a body corporate
 in liquidation, for the purpose of its administration for the
 benefit of the creditors of the bankrupt or body corporate
 and, subject thereto, for the benefit of other persons
 entitled to the beneficial interest in the property; or
 (iv) property subject to a trust, for the purpose of vesting
 the property in persons appointed as trustees under the
 instrument creating the trust or by a court or, by order of
 a court, for the purpose of giving effect to the trust.
 (7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of an Act
 of Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention
 of this section to the extent that the Act in question makes provision
 for the compulsory taking possession of property or the compulsory
 acquisition of any interest in or right over property where that property,
 interest or right is vested in a body corporate, established by law for
 public purposes, in which no moneys have been invested other than
 moneys provided by Parliament.
 Protection against   76. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be subjected
 arbitrary search or  to the search of his person or his property or the entry by others on his
 entry.          premises.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section
 to the extent that the law in question makes provision -
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public
 safety, public order, public morality, public health, town
 and country planning, the development and utilization of
 mineral resources, or the development or utilization of any
 other property in such a manner as to promote the public
 benefit;
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of promoting the
 rights or freedoms of other persons;
 (c) that authorizes an officer or agent of the Government of
 Kenya, or of a local government authority, or of a body
 corporate established by law for public purposes, to enter on
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 the premises of a person in order to inspect those premises
 or anything thereon for the purpose of a tax, rate or due
 or in order to carry out work connected with property
 that is lawfully on those premises and that belongs to that
 Government, authority or body corporate, as the case may
 be; or
 (d) that authorizes, for the purpose of enforcing thejudgment or
 order of a court in civil proceedings, the entry upon premises
 by order of a court,
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done
 under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in
 a democratic society.
 77. (1) If a person is charged with a criminal offence, then, unless Provisions to secure
 the charge is withdrawn, the case shall be afforded a fair hearing within protection of law.
 a reasonable time by an independent and impartial court established
 by law.
 (2) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence -
 (a) shall be presumed to be innocent until he is proved or has
 pleaded guilty;
 (b) shall be informed as soon as reasonably practicable, in a
 language that he understands and in detail, of the nature of
 the offence with which he is charged;
 (c) shall be given adequate time and facilities for the preparation
 of his defence;
 (d) shall be permitted to defend himself before the court in
 person or by a legal representative of his own choice;
 (e) shall be afforded facilities to examine in person or by his
 legal representative the witnesses called by the prosecution
 before the court and to obtain the attendance and carry out the
 examination of witnesses to testify on his behalf before the
 court on the same conditions as those applying to witnesses
 called by the prosecution; and
 (f) shall be permitted to have without payment the assistance
 of an interpreter if he cannot understand the language used
 at the trial of the charge,
 and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of
 the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered
 him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence.
 (3) When a person is tried for a criminal offence, the accused
 person or a person authorized by him in that behalf shall, if he so requires
 and subject to payment of such reasonable fee as may be prescribed by
 law, be given within a reasonable time after judgment a copy for the
 use of the accused person of any record of the proceedings made by or
 on behalf of the court.
 (4) No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal offence
 on account of an act or omission that did not, at the time it took place,
 constitute such an offence, and no penalty shall be imposed for a criminal
 offence that is severer in degree or description than the maximum
 penalty that might have been imposed for that offence at the time when
 it was committed.
 (5) No person who shows that he has been tried by a competent
 court for a criminal offence and either convicted or acquitted shall again
 be tried for that offence or for any other criminal offence of which he
 could have been convicted at the trial of that offence, save upon the
 order of a superior court in the course of appeal or review proceedings
 relating to the conviction or acquittal.
 (6) No person shall be tried for a criminal offence if he shows
 that he has been pardoned for that offence.
 (7) No person who is tried for a criminal offence shall be
 compelled to give evidence at the trial.
 (8) No person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless that
 offence is defined, and the penalty therefor is prescribed, in a written
 law:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent a court
 from punishing a person for contempt notwithstanding that the act or
 omission constituting the contempt is not defined in a written law and
 the penalty therefor is not so prescribed.
 (9) A court or other adjudicating authority prescribed by law for
 the determination of the existence or extent of a civil right or obligation
 shall be established by law and shall be independent and impartial; and
 where proceedings for such a determination are instituted by a person
 before such a court or other adjudicating authority, the case shall be
 given a fair hearing within a reasonable time.
 (10) Except with the agreement of all the parties thereto, all
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 proceedings of every court and proceedings for the determination of
 the existence or extent of any civil right or obligation before any other
 adjudicating authority, including the announcement of the decision of
 the court or other authority, shall be held in public.
 (11) Nothing in subsection (10) shall prevent the court or other
 adjudicating authority from excluding from the proceedings persons
 other than the parties thereto and their legal representatives to such
 extent as the court or other authority -
 (a) may by law be empowered to do and may consider
 necessary or expedient in circumstances where publicity
 would prejudice the interests of justice or in interlocutory
 proceedings or in the interests of public morality, the welfare
 of persons under the age of eighteen years or the protection
 of the private lives of persons concerned in the proceedings;
 or
 (b) may by law be empowered or required to do in the interests
 of defence, public safety or public order.
 (12) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of -
 (a) subsection (2) (a) to the extent that the law in question
 imposes upon a person charged with a criminal offence the
 burden of proving particular facts;
 (b) subsection (2) (e) to the extent that the law in question
 imposes conditions that must be satisfied if witnesses called
 to testify on behalf of an accused person are to be paid their
 expenses out of public funds; or
 (c) subsection (5) to the extent that the law in question
 authorizes a court to try a member of a disciplined force for
 a criminal offence notwithstanding a trial and conviction or
 acquittal of that member under the disciplinary law of that
 force, so, however, that a court so trying such a member and
 convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment
 take into account any punishment awarded him under that
 disciplinary law.
 (13) In the case of any person who is held in lawful detention,
 subsection (1), paragraphs (d) and (e) of subsection (2) and subsection
 (3) shall not apply in relation to his trial for a criminal offence under the
 law regulating the discipline of persons held in lawful detention.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (14) Nothing contained in subsection (2) (d) shall be construed
 as entitling a person to legal representation at public expense.
 (15) In this section "criminal offence" means a criminal offence
 under the law of Kenya.
 Protection of freedom  78. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered
 of conscience.  in the enjoyment of his freedom of conscience, and for the purposes of
 this section that freedom includes freedom of thought and of religion,
 freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in
 community with others, and both in public and in private, to manifest
 and propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice and
 observance.
 (2) Every religious community shall be entitled, at its own
 expense, to establish and maintain places of education and to manage a
 place of education which it wholly maintains; and no such community
 shall be prevented from providing religious instruction for persons of
 that community in the course of any education provided at a place of
 education which it wholly maintains or in the course of any education
 which it otherwise provides.
 (3) Except with his own consent (or, if he is a minor, the consent of
 his guardian), no person attending a place of education shall be required
 to receive religious instruction or to take part in or attend a religious
 ceremony or observance if that instruction, ceremony or observance
 relates to a religion other than his own.
 (4) No person shall be compelled to take an oath which is contrary
 to his religion or belief or to take an oath in a manner which is contrary
 to his religion or belief.
 (5) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any
 law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
 section to the extent that the law in question makes provision which is
 reasonably required -
 (a) in the interests of defence, public safety, public order, public
 morality or public health; or
 (b) for the purpose of protecting the rights and freedoms of
 other persons, including the right to observe and practise a
 religion without the unsolicited intervention of members of
 another religion,
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the
 thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
 (6) References in this section to a religion shall be construed
 as including references to a religious denomination, and cognate
 expressions shall be construed accordingly.
 79. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered
 in the enjoyment of his freedom of expression, that is to say, freedom
 to hold opinions without interference, freedom to receive ideas and
 information without interference, freedom to communicate ideas and
 information without interference (whether the communication be to the
 public generally or to any person or class of persons) and freedom from
 interference with his correspondence.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section
 to the extent that the law in question makes provision -
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public
 safety, public order, public morality or public health;
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting
 the reputations, rights and freedoms of other persons or the
 private lives of persons concerned in legal proceedings,
 preventing the disclosure of information received in
 confidence, maintaining the authority and independence of
 the courts or regulating the technical administration or the
 technical operation of telephony, telegraphy, posts, wireless
 broadcasting or television; or
 (c) that imposes restrictions upon public officers or upon persons
 in the service of a local government authority, and except so
 far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done
 under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably
 justifiable in a democratic society.
 80. (1) Except with his own consent, no person shall be hindered
 in the enjoyment of his freedom of assembly and association, that is to
 say, his right to assemble freely and associate with other persons and
 in particular to form or belong to trade unions or other associations for
 the protection of his interests.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section
 to the extent that the law in question makes provision -
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of defence, public
 
 Protection of freedom
 of expression.
 
 Protection of freedom
 of assembly and
 association.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 safety, public order, public morality or public health;
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of protecting the
 rights or freedoms of other persons;
 (c) that imposes restrictions upon public officers, members
 of a disciplined force, or persons in the service of a local
 government authority; or
 (d) for the registration of trade unions and associations of trade
 unions in a register established by or under any law, and for
 imposing reasonable conditions relating to the requirements
 for entry on such a register (including conditions as to the
 minimum number of persons necessary to constitute a trade
 union qualified for registration, or of members necessary
 to constitute an association of trade unions qualified for
 registration, and conditions whereby registration may be
 refused on the grounds that another trade union already
 registered or association of trade unions already registered,
 as the case may be, is sufficiently representative of the whole
 or of a substantial proportion of the interests in respect of
 which registration of a trade union or association of trade
 unions is sought),
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done
 under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in
 a democratic society.
 81. (1) No citizen of Kenya shall be deprived of his freedom of
 Protection of freedom  movement, that is to say, the right to move freely throughout Kenya, the
 of movement.    right to reside in any part of Kenya, the right to enter Kenya, the right
 to leave Kenya and immunity from expulsion from Kenya.
 (2) Any restriction on a person's freedom of movement that is
 involved in his lawful detention shall not be held to be inconsistent with
 or in contravention of this section.
 (3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section
 to the extent that the law in question makes provision -
 (a) for the imposition of restrictions on the movement or
 residence within Kenya of any person or on any person's right
 to leave Kenya that are reasonably required in the interests
 of defence, public safety or public order;
 
 (b) for the imposition of restrictions on the movement or
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 residence within Kenya or on the right to leave Kenya of
 persons generally or any class of persons that are reasonably
 required in the interests of defence, public safety, public
 order, public morality, public health or the protection
 or control of nomadic peoples and except so far as that
 provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the
 authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable
 in a democratic society;
 (c) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of a court, on the
 movement or residence within Kenya of any person or on any
 person's right to leave Kenya either in consequence of his
 having been found guilty of a criminal offence under the law
 of Kenya or for the purpose of ensuring that he appears before
 a court at a later date for trial of such a criminal offence or for
 proceedings preliminary to trial or for proceedings relating
 to his extradition or lawful removal from Kenya;
 (d) for the imposition of restrictions on the acquisition or use
 by any person of land or other property in Kenya;
 (e) for the imposition of restrictions upon the movement or
 residence within Kenya or on the right to leave Kenya of
 public officers or of members of a disciplined force;
 (f) for the removal of a person from Kenya to be tried or
 punished in some other country for a criminal offence under
 the law of that other country or to undergo imprisonment in
 some other country in execution of the sentence of a court
 in respect of a criminal offence under the law of Kenya of
 which he has been convicted; or
 (g) for the imposition of restrictions on the right of any person
 to leave Kenya that are reasonably required in order to secure
 the fulfilment of any obligations imposed on that person by
 law and except so far as that provision or, as the case may
 be, the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not
 to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
 (4) If a person whose freedom of movement has been restricted by
 virtue of a provision referred to in subsection (3) (a) so requests at any
 time during the period of that restriction not earlier than three months
 after the order was made or three months after he last made the request,
 as the case may be, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and
 impartial tribunal presided over by a person appointed by the President
 from among persons qualified to be appointed as a judge of the High
 Court.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (5) On a review by a tribunal in pursuance of subsection (4) of
 the case of a person whose freedom of movement has been restricted,
 the tribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or
 expediency of continuing that restriction to the authority by whom it was
 ordered and, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that authority shall
 be obliged to act in accordance with any such recommendations.
 (6) Until it is otherwise provided by Act of Parliament nothing
 in this section shall affect the operation of the Outlying Districts Act*
 Cap. 104.       or the Special Districts (Administration) Act* or any law amending or
 Cap. 105.       replacing either of those Acts:
 Provided that no law amending or replacing either of those Acts
 shall impose, or authorize the imposition of, restrictions on the rights
 guaranteed by this section greater than the restrictions on those rights
 in force under that Act on 311 May, 1963, and no such restriction shall
 be imposed under either of those Acts, or by or under any such law, in
 or in respect of any area other than an area in or in respect of which a
 restriction was in force under that Act on 311 May, 1963.
 Protection from      82. (1) Subject to subsections (4), (5) and (8), no law shall make
 discrimination on the  any provision that is discriminatory either of itself or in its effect.
 grounds of race, etc.
 9 of 1997. s. 9,     (2) Subject to subsections (6), (8) and (9), no person shall be
 treated in a discriminatory manner by a person acting by virtue of any
 written law or in the performance of the functions of a public office or
 a public authority.
 (3) In this section the expression "discriminatory" means affording
 different treatment to different persons attributable wholly or mainly to
 their respective descriptions by race, tribe, place of origin or residence
 or other local connexion, political opinions, colour, creed or sex
 whereby persons of one such description are subjected to disabilities or
 restrictions to which persons of another such description are not made
 subject or are accorded privileges or advantages which are not accorded
 to persons of another such description.
 (4) Subsection (1) shall not apply to any law so far as that law
 makes provision -
 (a) with respect to persons who are not citizens of Kenya;
 (b) with respect to adoption, marriage, divorce, burial,
 devolution of property on death or other matters of personal
 * The Outlying Districts Act (Cap. 104) and the Special Districts
 (Administration) Act (Cap. 105) were repealed by 10 of 1997.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 law;
 (c) for the application in the case of members of a particular
 race or tribe of customary law with respect to any matter to
 the exclusion of any law with respect to that matter which
 is applicable in the case of other persons; or
 (d) whereby persons of a description mentioned in subsection
 (3) may be subjected to a disability or restriction or may be
 accorded a privilege or advantage which, having regard to
 its nature and to special circumstances pertaining to those
 persons or to persons of any other such description, is
 reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
 (5) Nothing contained in any law shall be held to be inconsistent
 with or in contravention of subsection (1) to the extent that it makes
 provision with respect to standards or qualifications (not being standards
 or qualifications specifically relating to race, tribe, place of origin or
 residence or other local connexion, political opinion, colour or creed) to
 be required of a person who is appointed to an office in the public service,
 in a disciplined force, in the service of a local government authority or
 in a body corporate established by any law for public purposes.
 (6) Subsection (2) shall not apply to -
 (a) anything which is expressly or by necessary implication
 authorized to be done by a provision of law referred to in
 subsection (4); or
 (b) the giving or withholding of consent to a transaction in
 agricultural land by any body or authority established by or
 under any law for the purpose of controlling transactions in
 agricultural land.
 (7) Subject to subsection (8), no person shall be treated in a
 discriminatory manner in respect of access to shops, hotels, lodging-
 houses, public restaurants, eating houses, beer halls or places of
 public entertainment or in respect of access to places of public resort
 maintained wholly or partly out of public funds or dedicated to the use
 of the general public.
 (8) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
 shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this section
 to the extent that the law in question makes provision whereby persons
 of a description mentioned in subsection (3) may be subjected to a
 restriction on the rights and freedoms guaranteed by sections 76, 78,
 79, 80 and 81, being a restriction authorized by section 76 (2), 78 (5),
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 79 (2), 80 (2), or paragraph (a) or (b) of section 81 (3).
 (9) Nothing in subsection (2) shall affect any discretion relating
 to the institution, conduct or discontinuance of civil or criminal
 proceedings in a court that is vested in a person by or under this
 Constitution or any other law.
 Derogation from      83. (1) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of an Act
 fundamental rights  of Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention
 and freedoms.  of section 72, 76, 79, 80, 81 or 82 when Kenya is at war, and nothing
 contained in or done under the authority of any provision of Part III of
 Cap. 57.       the Preservation of Public Security Act shall be held to be inconsistent
 with or in contravention of those sections of this Constitution when
 and in so far as the provision is in operation by virtue of an order made
 under section 85.
 (2) Where a person is detained by virtue of a law referred to in
 subsection (1) the following provisions shall apply -
 (a) he shall, as soon as reasonably practicable and in any
 case not more than five days after the commencement of
 his detention, be furnished with a statement in writing in a
 language that he understands specifying in detail the grounds
 upon which he is detained;
 (b) not more than fourteen days after the commencement
 of his detention, a notification shall be published in the
 Kenya Gazette stating that he has been detained and giving
 particulars of the provision of law under which his detention
 is authorized;
 (c) not more than one month after the commencement of his
 detention and thereafter during his detention at intervals of
 not more than six months, his case shall be reviewed by an
 independent and impartial tribunal established by law and
 presided over by a person appointed by the President from
 among persons qualified to be appointed as a judge of the
 High Court;
 (d) he shall be afforded reasonable facilities to consult a legal
 representative of his own choice who shall be permitted to
 make representations to the tribunal appointed for the review
 of the case of the detained person; and
 (e) at the hearing of his case by the tribunal appointed for the
 review of his case he shall be permitted to appear in person
 or by a legal representative of his own choice.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (3) On a review by a tribunal in pursuance of this section of the
 case of a detained person, the tribunal may make recommendations
 concerning the necessity or expediency of continuing his detention to
 the authority by which it was ordered but, unless it is otherwise provided
 by law, that authority shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any
 such recommendations.
 (4) Nothing contained in subsection (2) (d) or (e) shall be construed
 as entitling a person to legal representation at public expense.
 84. (1) Subject to subsection (6), if a person alleges that any of Enforcement of
 the provisions of sections 70 to 83 (inclusive) has been, is being or is protective
 likely to be contravened in relation to him (or, in the case of a person  provisions.
 6 of 1992, s. 10.
 who is detained, if another person alleges a contravention in relation to  9 of 199s. 10.
 9 of 1997. s. 10.
 the detained person), then, without prejudice to any other action with
 respect to the same matter which is lawfully available, that person (or
 that other person) may apply to the High Court for redress.
 (2) The High Court shall have original jurisdiction -
 (a) to hear and determine an application made by a person in
 pursuance of subsection (1);
 (b) to determine any question arising in the case of a person
 which is referred to it in pursuance of subsection (3), and may
 make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions
 as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or
 securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections
 70 to 83 (inclusive).
 (3) If in proceedings in a subordinate court a question arises
 as to the contravention of any of the provisions of sections 70 to 83
 (inclusive), the person presiding in that court may, and shall if any party
 to the proceedings so requests, refer the question to the High Court
 unless, in his opinion, the raising of the question is merely frivolous
 and vexatious.
 (4) Where a question is referred to the High Court in pursuance of
 subsection (3), the High Court shall give its decision upon the question
 and the court in which the question arose shall dispose of the case in
 accordance with that decision.
 (5) Parliament -
 (a) may confer upon the High Court such powers in addition to
 those conferred by this section as may appear to be necessary
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 or desirable for the purpose of enabling that Court, more
 effectively, to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by
 this section; and
 (b) shall make provision -
 (i) for the rendering of financial assistance to any indigent
 citizen of Kenya where his right under this Chapter has
 been infringed or with a view to enabling him engage the
 services of an advocate to prosecute his claim; and
 (ii) for ensuring that allegations of infringement of such rights
 are substantial and the requirement or need for financial
 or legal aid is real.
 (6) The Chief Justice may make rules with respect to the practice
 and procedure of the High Court in relation to thejurisdiction and powers
 conferred on it by or under this section (including rules with respect to
 the time within which applications may be brought and references shall
 be made to the High Court).
 (7) A person aggrieved by the determination of the High Court
 under this section may appeal to the Court of Appeal as of right.
 Preservation of
 public security.       85. (1) Subject to this section, the President may at any time,
 by order published in the Kenya Gazette, bring into operation, generally
 Cap. 57.       or in any part of Kenya, Part III of the Preservation of Public Security
 Act or any of the provisions of that Part of that Act.
 (2) An order made under this section shall cease to have effect
 on the expiration of the period of twenty-eight days commencing with
 the day on which the order is made, unless before the expiration of that
 period it has been approved by a resolution of the National Assembly;
 but in reckoning any period of twenty-eight days for the purposes of
 this subsection no account shall be taken of any time during which
 Parliament is dissolved.
 (3) An order made under this section may at any time be revoked
 by the President by an order published in the Kenya Gazette.
 (4) An order made under this section and approved by a resolution
 of the National Assembly in accordance with subsection (2) may at
 any time be revoked by a resolution of the Assembly supported by a
 majority of all the members of the Assembly (excluding the ex officio
 members).
 
 (5) Whenever the election of the President results in a change in
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 the holder of that office an order made under this section and in force
 immediately before the day on which the President assumes office
 shall cease to have effect on the expiration of seven days commencing
 with that day.
 (6) The expiry or revocation of an order made under this section
 shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
 under the order or to the making of a new order.
 Interpretation and
 86. (1) In this Chapter, except where the context otherwise savings.
 requires -
 "contravention", in relation to a requirement, includes a failure
 to comply with that requirement, and cognate expressions shall be
 construed accordingly;
 "court" means any court having jurisdiction in Kenya other than
 a court established by a disciplinary law, but includes, in sections 71
 and 73, a court established by a disciplinary law;
 "disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of a
 disciplined force;
 "disciplined force" means -
 (a) any of the armed forces;
 (b) a police force;
 (c) a prison service; or
 (d) the National Youth Service;
 "legal representative" means a person entitled to practise as an
 advocate in Kenya; and
 "member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person
 who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to
 that discipline.
 (2) In relation to a person who is a member of a disciplined force
 raised under any law in force in Kenya, nothing contained in or done
 under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force shall be held
 to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of the provisions of
 this Chapter other than sections 71, 73 and 74.
 
 (3) In relation to a person who is a member of a disciplined force
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Persons who become
 citizens on 12th
 December. 1963.
 
 Persons entitled
 to be registered as
 citizens by virtue
 of connexion with
 Kenya before 12'
 December. 1963.
 
 raised otherwise than as aforesaid and lawfully present in Kenya, nothing
 contained in or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that
 force shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of
 the provisions of this Chapter.
 CHAPTER VI
 CITIZENSHIP
 87*. (1) Every person who, having been born in Kenya, is on
 lII December, 1963 a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies
 or a British protected person shall become a citizen of Kenya on 12"
 December, 1963:
 Provided that a person shall not become a citizen of Kenya by
 virtue of this subsection if neither of his parents was born in Kenya.
 (2) Every person who, having been born outside Kenya, is on
 1IIh December, 1963 a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies or
 a British protected person shall, if his father becomes, or would but for
 his death have become, a citizen of Kenya by virtue of subsection (1),
 become a citizen of Kenya on 121 December, 1963.
 88*. (1) A person who, but for the proviso to section 87 (1), would
 be a citizen of Kenya by virtue of that subsection shall be entitled, upon
 making application before the specified date in such manner as may
 be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, to be registered as a
 citizen of Kenya:
 Provided that a person who has not attained the age of twenty-one
 years (other than a woman who is or has been married) may not himself
 make an application under this subsection, but an application may be
 made on his behalf by his parent or guardian.
 (2) A woman who, on I Ih December, 1963, has been married to
 a person -
 (a) who becomes a citizen of Kenya by virtue of section 87;
 or
 (b) who, having died before 121 December, 1963, would, but
 for his death, have become a citizen of Kenya by virtue of
 that section,
 *Sections 87 and 88, although spent in their effect, are retained for
 the sake of clarification. The same applies to section 97(2) and section
 98(6)(b)
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 shall be entitled, upon making application in such manner as
 may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, to be
 registered as a citizen of Kenya.
 (3) A woman who, on I It' December, 1963, has been married to a
 person who becomes, or would but for his death have become, entitled
 to be registered as a citizen of Kenya under subsection (1) or (5), but
 whose marriage has been terminated by death or dissolution before 12h
 December, 1963, or is so terminated on or after that date but before that
 person exercises his right to be registered as a citizen of Kenya under
 either of those subsections, shall be entitled, upon making application
 before the specified date in such manner as may be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament, to be registered as a citizen of Kenya.
 (4) A person who, on 11LI December, 1963, is a citizen of the
 United Kingdom and Colonies or of the Republic of Ireland and is on
 that day ordinarily and lawfully resident in Kenya (otherwise than under
 the authority of a pass issued under the ImmigrationAct as then in force
 and conferring on him the right to remain in Kenya only temporarily)
 shall be entitled, upon making application before the specified date in
 such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament,
 to be registered as a citizen of Kenya:
 Provided that a person who has not attained the age of twenty-one
 years (other than a woman who is or has been married) may not himself
 make an application under this subsection, but an application may be
 made on his behalf by his parent or guardian.
 (5) A person who, on 11I December, 1963, is a citizen of the
 United Kingdom and Colonies -
 (a) having become such a citizen under the British Nationality
 Act, 1948 by virtue of his having been naturalized in Kenya
 as a British subject before that Act came into force; or
 (b) having become such a citizen by virtue of his having been
 naturalized or registered in Kenya under that Act,
 shall be entitled, upon making application before the specified date in
 such manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament,
 to be registered as a citizen of Kenya:
 Provided that a person who has not attained the age of twenty-one
 years (other than a woman who is or has been married) may not himself
 make an application under this subsection, but an application may be
 made on his behalf by his parent or guardian.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Persons born in
 Kenya after 1 lh
 December. 1963.
 6 of 1985. s. 2.
 
 Persons born outside
 Kenya after 11I
 December. 1963.
 Marriage to a Kenya
 citizen.
 Persons eligible to be
 registered as Kenya
 citizens.
 
 (6) In this section "the specified date" means -
 (a) in relation to a person to whom subsection (1), (4) or (5)
 refers, 121 December, 1965; and
 (b) in relation to a woman to whom subsection (3) refers, 12'h
 December, 1965 or the expiration of such period after the
 termination of her marriage as may be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament (whichever is the later),
 or such later date as may in any particular case be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament.
 89. Every person born in Kenya after llIh December, 1963 shall
 become a citizen of Kenya if at the date of his birth one of his parents
 is a citizen of Kenya; except that a person shall not become a citizen of
 Kenya by virtue of this section if at the date of his birth -
 (a) his father possesses immunity from suit and legal process
 as is accorded to the envoy of a foreign state accredited to
 Kenya; or
 (b) his father is a citizen of a country with which Kenya is at
 war and the birth occurs in a place then under occupation
 by that country.
 90. A person born outside Kenya after 111 December, 1963 shall
 become a citizen of Kenya at the date of his birth if at that date his
 father is a citizen of Kenya.
 91. A woman who has been married to a citizen of Kenya
 shall be entitled, upon making application in such manner as may
 be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, to be registered as a
 citizen of Kenya.
 92. (1) A person who, being a Commonwealth citizen or a
 citizen of a country in Africa to which this subsection applies, has been
 ordinarily resident in Kenya for such period (whether commencing
 before, on or after 12' December, 1963) and under such authority as
 may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament shall be eligible,
 upon making application in such manner as may be so prescribed, to be
 registered as a citizen of Kenya, and the Minister may cause any such
 person who so applies to be so registered.
 (2) A person shall be eligible, upon making application in such
 manner as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, to be
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 registered as a citizen of Kenya if, at the date of his application, one of
 his parents is a citizen of Kenya, and the Minister may cause any such
 person who so applies to be so registered:
 Provided that a person who has not attained the age of twenty-one
 years (other than a woman who is or has been married) may not himself
 make an application under this subsection, but an application may be
 made on his behalf by his parent or guardian.
 (3) The countries in Africa to which subsection (1) of this section
 applies (other than the countries to which section 95 applies) are
 countries which are for the time being declared by the Minister, by notice
 published in the Kenya Gazette, to be countries which permit citizens
 of Kenya to become citizens of those countries by registration.
 93. A person who -                                      Persons eligible to be
 naturalized as Kenya
 (a) has attained the age of twenty-one years;              citizens.
 (b) has been ordinarily and lawfully resident in Kenya for
 the period of twelve months immediately preceding his
 application under this section;
 (c) has been ordinarily and lawfully resident in Kenya for a
 period of, or for periods amounting in the aggregate to, not
 less than four years in the seven years immediately preceding
 the said period of twelve months;
 (d) satisfies the Minister that he is of good character;
 (e) satisfies the Minister that he has an adequate knowledge of
 the Swahili language; and
 (f) satisfies the Minister that he intends, if naturalized as a citizen
 of Kenya, to continue to reside in Kenya,
 shall be eligible, upon making application in such manner as
 may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament, to be
 naturalized as a citizen of Kenya, and the Minister may
 grant a certificate of naturalization to any such person who
 so applies.
 94. (1) The Minister may, by order published in the Kenya Gazette Deprivation of
 and after such procedure as may be prescribed by or under an Act of citizenship.
 Parliament, deprive of his citizenship of Kenya any person who is a
 citizen by registration or naturalization if the Minister is satisfied -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (a) that that citizen has shown himself by act or speech to be
 disloyal or disaffected towards Kenya; or
 (b) that that citizen has, during any war in which Kenya was
 engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy
 or been engaged in or associated with any business that was
 to his knowledge carried on in such a manner as to assist an
 enemy in that war; or
 (c) that, within the period of five years commencing with
 the date of the registration or naturalization, a sentence
 of imprisonment of or exceeding twelve months has been
 imposed on that citizen by a court in any country or has been
 substituted by competent authority for some other sentence
 imposed on him by such a court; or
 (d) that that citizen has, since becoming a citizen of Kenya,
 been ordinarily resident in countries other than Kenya for
 a continuous period of seven years and during that period
 has neither -
 (i) been at any time in the service of Kenya or of an
 international organization of which Kenya was a member;
 nor
 (ii) registered annually at a Kenya consulate his intention to
 retain his citizenship of Kenya; or
 (e) that the registration or naturalization was obtained by
 means of fraud, false representation or the concealment of
 any material fact.
 (2) For the purposes of subsection (1) (c) -
 (a) a person shall not be regarded as having had imposed on
 him a sentence of imprisonment of or exceeding twelve
 months if he has been granted a free pardon in respect of the
 offence for which he was so sentenced or if his conviction
 for that offence has been set aside or if his sentence has
 been reduced to a term of imprisonment of less than twelve
 months or if a sentence other than imprisonment has been
 substituted therefor;
 (b) two or more sentences that are required to be served
 consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentences if none
 of them amounts to or exceeds twelve months; and
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (c) no account shall be taken of a sentence of imprisonment
 imposed as an alternative to or in default of, the payment
 of a fine.
 95. (1) Every person who, under this Constitution or an Act of Commonwealth
 Parliament, is a citizen of Kenya or who, under any law for the time citizens.
 being in force in a country to which this section applies, is a citizen
 of that country shall, by virtue of that citizenship, have the status of a
 Commonwealth citizen.
 (2) Every person who was a British subject without citizenship
 under the British Nationality Act, 1948, or who continued to be a British
 subject under section 2 of that Act, shall, by virtue of that status, have
 the status of a Commonwealth citizen.
 (3) Save as may be otherwise provided by Parliament, the countries
 to which this section applies are the United Kingdom and Colonies,
 Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, Sri Lanka, Ghana, Malaysia,
 Nigeria, Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago,
 Uganda, Malawi, Malta, Zambia, The Gambia, Singapore, Guyana,
 Botswana, Lesotho, Barbados, Swaziland, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, and
 any other country that may be prescribed by Parliament.
 96. (1) Parliament may provide for the acquisition of citizenship Powers of
 of Kenya (whether by registration or by naturalization) by persons Parliament.
 who are not eligible or who are no longer eligible to become citizens
 of Kenya under this Chapter.
 (2) Parliament may provide for the renunciation by a person of
 his citizenship of Kenya.
 97. (1) A person who, upon the attainment of the age of twenty-one Dual citizenship.
 years, is a citizen of Kenya and also a citizen of some country other than
 Kenya shall, subject to subsection (7), cease to be a citizen of Kenya
 upon the specified date unless he has renounced his citizenship of that
 other country, taken the oath of allegiance and, in the case of a person
 who was born outside Kenya, made and registered such declaration of
 his intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed by or under
 an Act of Parliament.
 (2)* A person who -
 (a) has attained the age of twenty-one years before 12th
 December, 1963; and
 *See note at foot of page 70.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (b) becomes a citizen of Kenya on that day by virtue of section
 87; and
 (c) is immediately after that day also a citizen of some country
 other than Kenya,
 shall subject to subsection (7), cease to be a citizen of Kenya upon
 the specified date unless he has renounced his citizenship of that other
 country, taken the oath of allegiance and, in the case of a person who is
 a citizen of Kenya by virtue of section 87 (2), made and registered such
 declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed
 by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (3) A citizen of Kenya shall, subject to subsection (7), cease to
 be such a citizen if -
 (a) having attained the age of twenty-one years, he acquires the
 citizenship of some country other than Kenya by voluntary
 act (other than marriage); or
 (b) having attained the age of twenty-one years, he otherwise
 acquires the citizenship of some country other than Kenya
 and has not, by the specified date, renounced his citizenship
 of that other country, taken the oath of allegiance and made
 and registered such declaration of his intentions concerning
 residence as may be prescribed by or under an Act of
 Parliament.
 (4) A person who has attained the age of twenty-one years (or is
 a woman who is or has been married) and who -
 (a) becomes a citizen of Kenya by registration under section
 88, 91, 92 or 96 or by naturalization under section 93 or
 96; and
 (b) is immediately after the day upon which he becomes a citizen
 of Kenya, also a citizen of some other country,
 shall, subject to subsection (7), cease to be a citizen of Kenya upon
 the specified date unless he has renounced his citizenship of that other
 country, taken the oath of allegiance and made and registered such
 declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may be prescribed
 by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (5) For the purposes of this section, where, under the law of a
 country other than Kenya, a person cannot renounce his citizenship of
 that other country, he need not make the renunciation but he may instead
 be required to make such declaration concerning that citizenship as may
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (6) In this section "the specified date" means -
 (a) in relation to a person to whom subsection (1) refers, the
 date on which he attains the age of twenty-three years;
 (b)* in relation to a person to whom subsection (2) refers, 12h
 December, 1965;
 (c) in relation to a person to whom subsection (3)(b) refers,
 the expiration of a period of two years commencing with
 the date on which he acquired the citizenship of the country
 other than Kenya; and
 (d) in relation to a person to whom subsection (4) refers, the
 expiration of a period of three months after the date upon
 which he became a citizen of Kenya,
 or, in the case of a person of unsound mind, such later date as may be
 prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (7) Provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament for
 extending beyond the specified date the period in which a person may
 make a renunciation of citizenship, take an oath or make or register a
 declaration for the purposes of this section, and, if provision is so made,
 that person shall not cease to be a citizen of Kenya upon the specified
 date but shall cease to be a citizen upon the expiration of the extended
 period if he has not then made the renunciation, taken the oath or made
 or registered the declaration, as the case may be.
 98. (1) In this Chapter -                               Interpretation
 "the British Nationality Act, 1948" means the Act of that title
 enacted by the Parliament of the United Kingdom;
 "British protected person" means a person who is a British
 protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act, 1948;
 and
 "the Minister" means the Minister who is for the time being
 responsible for matters relating to citizenship of Kenya.
 (2) For the purposes of this Chapter, a person born aboard a
 registered ship or aircraft, or aboard an unregistered ship or aircraft
 *See note at foot of page 70.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Consolidated Fund
 and other funds of
 the Government of
 Kenya.
 
 Authorization of
 expenditure from
 Consolidated Fund
 by appropriation.
 
 of the Government of any country, shall be deemed to have been born
 in the place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case
 may be, in that country.
 (3) A reference in this Chapter to the national status of the father
 of a person at the time of that person's birth shall, in relation to a person
 born after the death of his father, be construed as a reference to the
 national status of the father at the time of the father's death; and where
 that death occurred before 121 December, 1963 and the birth occurred
 after I t' December, 1963 the national status that the father would have
 had if he had died on 121 December, 1963 shall be deemed to be his
 national status at the time of his death.
 CHAPTER VII
 FINANCE
 99. (1) Subject to subsection (2), all revenues or other moneys
 raised or received for the purposes of the Government of Kenya shall
 be paid into and form a Consolidated Fund from which no moneys shall
 be withdrawn except as may be authorized by this Constitution or by
 an Act of Parliament (including an Appropriation Act) or by a vote on
 account passed by the National Assembly under section 101.
 (2) Provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament
 for any revenues or other moneys received for the purposes of the
 Government of Kenya to be paid into some public fund (other than the
 Consolidated Fund) established for a specific purpose, or to be retained
 by the authority that received them for the purpose of defraying the
 expenses of that authority, but no moneys shall be withdrawn from any
 such public fund unless the issue of those moneys has been authorized
 by or under a law.
 (3) Where any moneys are charged by this Constitution or any
 Act of Parliament upon the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund
 of the Government of Kenya, they shall be paid out of that fund by the
 Government of Kenya to the person or authority to whom payment is
 due.
 (4) Parliament may prescribe the manner in which withdrawals
 may be made from the Consolidated Fund or any other fund of the
 Government of Kenya.
 100. (1) The Minister for the time being responsible for finance
 shall cause to be prepared and laid before the National Assembly in
 each financial year estimates of the revenues and expenditure of the
 Government of Kenya for the next following financial year.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (2) When the estimates of expenditure (other than expenditure
 charged upon the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution or by any
 Act of Parliament) have been approved by the National Assembly, a
 Bill, to be known as an Appropriation Bill, shall be introduced into
 the Assembly, providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of
 the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of
 those sums, under separate votes for the several services required, to
 the purposes specified therein.
 (3) If in respect of any financial year it is found -
 (a) that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act
 to any purpose is insufficient or that a need has arisen for
 expenditure for a purpose to which no amount has been
 appropriated by that Act; or
 (b) that any moneys have been expended for a purpose in
 excess of the amount appropriated to that purpose by the
 Appropriation Act or for a purpose to which no amount has
 been appropriated by that Act,
 a supplementary estimate or, as the case may be, a statement of excess
 showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National
 Assembly and, when the supplementary estimate or statement of excess
 has been approved by the Assembly, a supplementary Appropriation
 Bill shall be introduced into the Assembly, providing for the issue of
 those sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them to the
 purposes specified therein.
 Authorization of
 101. If the Appropriation Act for a financial year has not come eupenditre
 expenditure
 into operation, or is not likely to come into operation, by the beginning in advance of
 of that financial year, the National Assembly may, by a vote on account, appropriation.
 authorize the withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of moneys (not
 exceeding in total one-half of the sums included in the estimates of
 expenditure for that year that have been laid before the Assembly) for
 the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services
 of the Government of Kenya during that year until such time as the
 Appropriation Act comes into operation, but any moneys so withdrawn
 shall be included, under separate votes for the several services in respect
 of which they were withdrawn, in the Appropriation Act.
 102. (1) Parliament may make provision for the establishment Contingencies Fund.
 of a Contingencies Fund and for authorizing the Minister for the time
 being responsible for finance, if he is satisfied that there has arisen an
 urgent and unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision
 exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (2) Where an advance is made from the Contingencies Fund,
 a supplementary estimate shall be presented and a supplementary
 Appropriation Bill shall be introduced as soon as possible for the purpose
 of replacing the amount so advanced.
 Public debt of
 Government of        103. (1) All debt charges for which the Government of Kenya is
 Kenya.         liable shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
 (2) For the purposes of this section debt charges include interest,
 sinking fund charges, the repayment or amortization of debt, and all
 expenditure in connexion with the raising of loans on the security of
 the Consolidated Fund and the service and redemption of debt created
 thereby.
 Remuneration of
 certain officers.    104. (1) There shall be paid to the holders of the offices to
 13 of 1977. s. 4.  which this section applies such salary and such allowances as may be
 prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (2) The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of
 the offices to which this section applies shall be charged upon the
 Consolidated Fund.
 (3) The salary payable to the holder of an office to which this
 section applies and his other terms of service (other than allowances that
 are not taken into account in computing, under any law in that behalf,
 any pension payable in respect of his service in that office) shall not be
 altered to his disadvantage after his appointment.
 (4) When a person's salary or other terms of service depend upon
 his option, the salary or terms for which he opts shall, for the purposes
 of subsection (3), be deemed to be more advantageous to him than any
 others for which he might have opted.
 (5) This section applies to the offices ofjudge of the High Court,
 judge of the Court of Appeal, member of the Public Service Commission,
 member of the Electoral Commission, Attorney-General and Controller
 and Auditor-General.
 (6) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prejudicing the
 provisions of section 112 (which protects certain pensions rights).
 Controller and
 Auditor-General.     105. (1) There shall be a Controller and Auditor-General whose
 office shall be an office in the public service.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Controller and Auditor-General -
 
 (a) to satisfy himself that any proposed withdrawal from the
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Consolidated Fund is authorized by law, and, if so satisfied,
 to approve the withdrawal;
 (b) to satisfy himself that all moneys that have been appropriated
 by Parliament and disbursed have been applied to the
 purposes to which they were so appropriated and that the
 expenditure conforms to the authority that governs it; and
 (c) at least once in every year to audit and report on the public
 accounts of the Government of Kenya, the accounts of all
 officers and authorities of that Government, the accounts of
 all courts in Kenya (other than courts no part of the expenses
 of which are defrayed directly out of moneys provided by
 Parliament), the accounts of every Commission established
 by this Constitution and the accounts of the Clerk of the
 National Assembly.
 (3) The Controller and Auditor-General and any officer authorized
 by him shall have access to all books, records, returns, reports and other
 documents which in his opinion relate to any of the accounts referred
 to in subsection (2).
 (4) The Controller and Auditor-General shall submit every report
 made by him in pursuance of subsection (2) to the Minister for the time
 being responsible for finance who shall, not later than seven days after
 the National Assembly first meets after he has received the report, lay
 it before the Assembly.
 (5) In the exercise of his functions under subsections (2), (3)
 and (4), the Controller and Auditor-General shall not be subject to the
 direction or control of any other person or authority.
 CHAPTER VIII
 THE PUBLIC SERVICE
 106. (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission which shall Public Service
 consist of a chairman, a deputy chairman and fifteen other members.  Commission.
 7 of 1984, s. 4.
 (2) The members of the Commission shall be appointed by the 4 of 1988, s. 6.
 (2sen   m17 of 1990, s. 5.
 President.
 (3) Subject to subsection (4), a person shall not be qualified to be
 appointed as a member of the Commission if -
 (a) he is, or has at any time been, a member of the National
 Assembly, or he has at any time been a member of either
 House of the National Assembly formerly established for
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Kenya, a member of a Provincial Council or a Regional
 Assembly formerly established for Kenya or a member (other
 than an ex officio, an appointed or a nominated member) of
 any Legislative Council established for Kenya at any time
 before 121 December, 1963; or
 (b) he is, or has at any time been, nominated as a candidate for
 election as a member of the National Assembly, or of a former
 House of the National Assembly, or of a former Provincial
 Council, Regional Assembly or Legislative Council; or
 (c) he is, or has at any time been, the holder of an office in any
 political organization that sponsors or otherwise supports, or
 has at any time sponsored or otherwise supported, a candidate
 for election as a member of the National Assembly or of
 any such former House of the National Assembly, former
 Provincial Council, Regional Assembly or Legislative
 Council.
 (4) The disqualifications referred to in subsection (3) shall cease
 to be disqualifications in respect of a person when Parliament has been
 dissolved on two occasions after that person ceased to be such a member,
 candidate or holder of office.
 (5) Subject to subsection (7), the office of a member of the
 Commission shall become vacant -
 (a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his
 appointment; or
 (b) if he accepts any office the holding of which, if he were not
 a member of the Commission, would make him ineligible for
 appointment to the office of member of the Commission.
 (6) The President may remove a member of the Commission from
 office only for failure to discharge the functions of his office (whether
 arising from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause) or for
 misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except in accordance with
 this section.
 (7) A member of the Commission shall be removed from office
 by the President if the question of his removal from office has been
 referred to a tribunal appointed under subsection (8) and the tribunal
 has recommended to the President that he ought to be removed from
 office for inability as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.
 (8) If the President considers that the question of removing a
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 member of the Commission under this section ought to be investigated,
 then -
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of
 a chairman and four other members selected by the President
 from among persons -
 (i) who hold or have held office as judge of the High Court
 or judge of appeal; or
 (ii) who are qualified to be appointed as judges of the High
 Court under section 61 (3); or
 (iii) upon whom the rank of Senior Counsel has been
 conferred by the President under section 17 of the  Cap. 16.
 Advocates Act; and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the
 facts thereof to the President and recommend to him whether
 the member ought to be removed under this section.
 (9) If the question of removing a member of the Commission
 has been referred to a tribunal under this section, the President may
 suspend that member from the exercise of the functions of his office
 and the suspension may at any time be revoked by the President, and
 shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the
 President that the member should not be removed.
 (10) If the office of chairman of the Commission is vacant or
 the chairman is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his
 office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed
 the functions of that office or until the person holding that office has
 resumed those functions, as the case may be, the deputy chairman or,
 if the office of deputy chairman is vacant or the deputy chairman is for
 any reason unable to perform the functions of the office of chairman,
 such one of the other members as the President may appoint shall act as
 chairman; and the deputy chairman or the other member shall, subject
 to subsections (5), (7) and (9), continue to act until a person has been
 appointed to the office of chairman and has assumed the functions of
 that office or, as the case may be, until the person in whose place he is
 acting has assumed or resumed those functions.
 (11) If the office of a member of the Commission other than the
 chairman is vacant or if such a member is acting as chairman under
 subsection (10) or is for any other reason unable to exercise the functions
 of his office, the President may appoint a person who is qualified to be
 appointed to be a member to act in place of that member; and a person
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 so appointed shall, subject to subsection (5), (7) and (9), continue to act
 until a person has been appointed to the office in which he is acting and
 has assumed the functions of that office or, as the case may be, until the
 person in whose place he is acting has resumed those functions.
 (12) Subject to this Chapter, the Commission shall, in the exercise
 of its functions under this Constitution, not be subject to the direction
 or control of any other person or authority.
 (13) Subject to this Chapter, the Commission may by regulation
 or otherwise regulate its own procedure and, with the consent of the
 President, may confer powers or impose duties on any public officer or
 authority for the purpose of the discharge of its functions.
 (14) The Commission may, subject to its rules of procedure,
 act notwithstanding a vacancy in its membership or the absence of a
 member and its proceedings shall not be invalidated by the presence or
 participation of a person not entitled to be present at or to participate
 in those proceedings:
 Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the
 concurrence of a majority of all the members thereof.
 Appointment, etc., of
 Apitmen, ofcr. o107. (1) Subject to this Constitution, the power to appoint persons
 public officers.
 7 of 1982. s.8.  to hold or act in offices in the public service and in the service of local
 7 of 1984. s.5.  authorities (including the power to confirm appointments), the power
 to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in those
 offices and the power to remove those persons from office shall vest in
 the Public Service Commission:
 Provided that the Commission may, with the approval of the
 President and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, by directions
 in writing, delegate any of its powers under this section to any one or
 more of its members or to any officer in the public service or, in the
 case of appointments to the service of local authorities, to particular
 local authorities.
 (2) Subject to this section and section 106 (12), provision may be
 made by or under an Act of Parliament for prescribing the manner of the
 exercise of the functions of the Public Service Commission under this
 section and for any matters incidental or supplementary to the exercise
 of those functions.
 (3) No person shall be appointed under this section to or to
 act in an office on the personal staff of the President except with the
 concurrence of the President.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (4) Subsection (1) shall not apply in relation to any of the
 following offices in the public service -
 (a) the office of the judge of the High Court or the Court of
 Appeal;
 (b) the office of Attorney-General;
 (c) the office of Controller and Auditor-General;
 (d) so far as relates to appointments thereto or to act therein,
 the office of Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Cabinet,
 Director of Personnel or Commissioner of Police;
 (e) the office of Ambassador, High Commissioner or other
 principal representative of Kenya in another country.
 (f) an office to which section 69 (which relates to offices
 within the jurisdiction of the Judicial Service Commission)
 applies; or
 (g) an office in the Kenya Police Force to which section 108
 (2) (b) applies.
 Appointment. etc., of
 108. (1) The power to appoint a person to hold or act in the members of Kenya
 office of Commissioner of Police shall vest in the President.  Police Force.
 (2) The power to appoint persons to hold or act in offices in the
 Kenya Police Force (except the office of Commissioner of Police),
 including the power to confirm appointments, the power to exercise
 disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in those offices and
 the power to remove those persons from office shall vest -
 (a) in the case of offices of or above the rank of Assistant
 Inspector, or such rank other than the rank of Assistant
 Inspector as may be specified for the purposes of this section
 by or under an Act of Parliament, in the Public Service
 Commission;
 (b) in the case of offices below the rank of Assistant Inspector,
 or such other rank as may be specified as aforesaid, in the
 Commissioner of Police:
 Provided that -
 (i) the Commission may, by directions in writing and subject
 to such conditions as it thinks fit, delegate any of its
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 powers under this section to any one or more members
 of the Commission or to the Commissioner;
 (ii) the Commissioner may, by directions given in such
 manner as he thinks fit and subject to such conditions as
 he thinks fit, delegate any of his powers under this section
 to any member of the Kenya Police Force.
 Attorney-General.    109. (1) The Attorney-General shall be appointed by the
 14 of 1986. s.  President.
 17 of 1990. s.6.
 (2) If the office of Attorney-General is vacant or if the Attorney-
 General is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of his office,
 the President may appoint a person to act as Attorney-General, and
 a person so appointed shall, subject to subsections (4), (6) and (8),
 continue to act until a person has been appointed to the office of
 Attorney-General and has assumed the functions of that office or, as the
 case may be, until the person in whose place he is acting has resumed
 those functions.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed to hold or to
 act in the office of Attorney-General unless he holds and has held for a
 total period of not less than five years one or other of the qualifications
 Cap. 16(1986).  specified in paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 12 (1) of the
 Advocates Act as in force on 121 December, 1963.
 (4) Subject to subsection (6), the Attorney-General shall vacate his
 office when he attains such age as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (5) The Attorney-General may be removed from office only for
 inability to exercise the functions of his office (whether arising from
 infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or for misbehaviour, and
 shall not be removed except in accordance with this section.
 (6) The Attorney-General shall be removed from office by the
 President if the question of his removal from office has been referred
 to a tribunal appointed under subsection (7) and the tribunal has
 recommended to the President that he ought to be removed for inability
 as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.
 (7) If the President considers that the question of removing the
 Attorney- General under this section ought to be investigated, then -
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of
 a chairman and four other members selected by the President
 from among persons -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (i) who hold or have held office as judge of the High Court
 or judge of appeal; or
 (ii) who are qualified to be appointed as judges of the High
 Court under section 61 (13); or
 (iii) upon whom the rank of Senior Counsel has been
 conferred by the President under section 17 of the    Cap. 16.
 Advocates Act; and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on
 the facts thereof to the President and recommend to him
 whether the Attorney-General ought to be removed under
 this section.
 (8) If the question of removing the Attorney-General has been
 referred to a tribunal under this section, the President may suspend the
 Attorney-General from the exercise of the functions of his office and
 any such suspension may at any time be revoked by the President, and
 shall in any case cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the
 President that the Attorney-General should not be removed.
 Controller and
 110. (1) The Controller and Auditor-General shall be appointed AuditorGeneral.
 by the President.                                            14 of 1986, s. 5.
 17 of 1990, s. 6.
 (2) If the office of Controller and Auditor-General is vacant or if
 the Controller and Auditor-General is for any reason unable to exercise
 the functions of his office, the President may appoint a person to act
 as Controller and Auditor-General, and a person so appointed shall,
 subject to subsections (3), (5) and (7) continue to act until a person has
 been appointed to the office of Controller and Auditor-General and has
 assumed the functions of that office or, as the case may be, until the
 person in whose place he is acting has resumed those functions.
 (3) Subject to subsection (5), the Controller and Auditor-General
 shall vacate his office when he attains such age as may be prescribed
 by Parliament.
 (4) A person holding the office of Controller and Auditor-General
 may be removed from office only for inability to discharge the functions
 of his office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or any
 other cause) or for misbehaviour, and shall not be so removed except
 in accordance with this section.
 (5) The Controller and Auditor-General shall be removed from
 office by the President if the question of his removal from office has been
 referred to a tribunal appointed under subsection (6) and the tribunal has
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 recommended to the President that he ought to be removed for inability
 as aforesaid or for misbehaviour.
 (6) If the President considers that the question of removing
 the Controller and Auditor-General under this section ought to be
 investigated, then -
 (a) the President shall appoint a tribunal which shall consist of
 a chairman and four other members selected by the President
 from among persons -
 (i) who hold or have held office as judges of the High Court
 or judges of appeal; or
 (ii) who are qualified to be appointed as judges of the High
 Court under section 61 (3); or
 (iii) upon whom the rank of Senior Counsel has been
 conferred by the President under section 17 of the
 Cap. 16.               Advocates Act; and
 (b) the tribunal shall inquire into the matter and report on the
 facts thereof to the President and recommend to him whether
 the Controller and Auditor-General ought to be removed
 under this section.
 (7) If the question of removing the Controller and Auditor-General
 has been referred to a tribunal under this section, the President may
 suspend the Controller and Auditor-General from the exercise of the
 functions of his office and any such suspension may at any time be
 revoked by the President, and shall in any case cease to have effect
 if the tribunal recommends to the President that the Controller and
 Auditor-General should not be removed.
 Appointment          111. (1) The power to appoint a person to hold or act in the office of
 of Permanent    Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Cabinet or Director of Personnel
 Secretaries,   shall vest in the President.
 Ambassadors, etc.
 7 of 1982. s. 8,    (2) The power to appoint a person to hold or act in the office of
 14 of 1986. s. 6.  Ambassador, High Commissioner or other principal representative of
 Kenya in another country, and to remove from office a person holding
 or acting in any such office, shall vest in the President:
 Provided that before exercising a power conferred by this
 subsection in relation to a person who holds an office in the public
 service, other than an office to which this subsection applies, the
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 President shall consult the Public Service Commission.
 112. (1) The law to be applied with respect to pensions benefits Pensions laws
 that were granted to a person before 121 December, 1963 shall be the law and protection of
 that was in force at the date on which those benefits were granted or any  pensions rights.
 law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.
 (2) The law to be applied with respect to pensions benefits (not
 being benefits to which subsection (1) applies) shall -
 (a) in so far as those benefits are wholly in respect of a period
 of service as a public officer that commenced before 12h
 December, 1963, be the law that was in force on 11th
 December, 1963; and
 (b) in so far as those benefits are wholly or partly in respect of
 a period of service as a public officer that commenced after
 I 1I December, 1963, be the law in force on the date on which
 that period of service commenced,
 or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that
 person.
 (3) Where a person is entitled to exercise an option as to which
 of two or more laws shall apply in this case, the law for which he opts
 shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be more favourable
 to him than the other law or laws.
 (4) All pensions benefits shall (except to the extent to which, in
 the case of benefits under the Provident Fund Act, the Widows' and Cap. 191.
 Orphans' Pensions Act, the Asian Widows' and Orphans' Pensions Act Cap. 192.
 and the Asian Officers' Family Pensions Act or under any law amending Cap. 193.
 or replacing any of those Acts, they are a charge on a fund established Cap. 194.
 by any of those Acts or by any such law and have been duly paid out of
 that fund to the person or authority to whom payment is due) be charged
 upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (5) All sums that, under any of the Acts referred to in subsection
 (4) or under any law amending or replacing any of those Acts, are to be
 paid by the Government of Kenya into a fund established by any of those
 Acts or by any such law or are otherwise to be paid by the Government
 of Kenya for the purposes of any of those Acts or any such law shall be
 charged upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (6) A person who is entitled to the payment of pensions benefits
 and who is ordinarily resident outside Kenya may, within a reasonable
 time after he has received that payment, remit the whole of it (free from
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 any deduction, charge or tax made or levied in respect of its remission)
 to any country of his choice outside Kenya:
 Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
 preventing -
 (i) the attachment, by order of a court, of a payment or part
 of a payment to which a person is entitled in satisfaction
 of the judgment of a court or pending the determination
 of civil proceedings to which he is a party to the extent
 to which that attachment is permitted by the law with
 respect to pensions benefits that applies in the case of
 that person; or
 (ii) the imposition of reasonable restrictions as to the manner
 in which a payment is to be remitted.
 (7) In this section "pensions benefits" means any pensions,
 compensation, gratuities or other like allowances for persons in respect
 of their service as public officers or for the widows, children, dependants
 or personal representatives of those persons in respect of that service.
 (8) References in this section to the law with respect to pensions
 benefits include (without prejudice to their generality) references to
 the law regulating the circumstances in which those benefits may be
 granted or in which the grant of those benefits may be refused, the law
 regulating the circumstances in which any such benefits that have been
 granted may be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended and the law
 regulating the amount of any such benefits.
 (9) For the purposes of this section -
 (a) an office in any naval, military or air force established by
 or under any law made by a legislature in Kenya;
 (b) to the extent to which pensions benefits in respect of service
 in such an office are payable under any of the Acts referred
 to in subsection (4) or under any law amending or replacing
 any of those Acts, an office in the service of the East Africa
 High Commission, the East African Common Services
 Organization or the East African Community; and
 (c) an office in the service of any of the following bodies (which
 are bodies that are no longer in existence but in respect of
 former service in which pensions are payable out of Kenya
 funds) -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya                      91
 (i) the Combined Posts and Telegraphs Department of Kenya
 and Uganda;
 (ii) the Amalgamated Posts and Telegraphs Department of
 Kenya, Uganda and Tanganyika;
 (iii) the Customs Department (Kenya and Uganda);
 (iv) the Kenya and Uganda Joint Imports Control
 Organization;
 (v) the Joint Income Tax Department;
 (vi) the Kenya Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve;
 (vii) the Northern Brigade, King's African Rifles;
 (viii) the Zanzibar Branch Audit Office;
 (ix) the following departments of the Conference of East
 African Governors -
 (a) the Secretariat;
 (b) the British East Africa Meteorological Service;
 (c) the Statistical Section;
 (d) the East African Production and Supply Council;
 (e) the East African War Supplies Board;
 (f) the East African Directorate of Civil Aviation; and
 (g) the Directorate of Training,
 shall be regarded as an office in the public service.
 113. (1) Where under any law a person or authority has a Power to withhold
 discretion-                                                pensions, etc.
 (a) to decide whether or not any pensions benefits shall be
 granted; or
 (b) to withhold, reduce in amount or suspend any such benefits
 that have been granted,
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in
 amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission concurs in
 the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision
 to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
 (2) Where the amount of any pensions benefits that may be granted
 to a person is not fixed by law, the amount of the benefits to be granted
 to him shall be the greatest amount for which he is eligible unless the
 Public Service Commission concurs in his being granted benefits of a
 smaller amount.
 (3) The Public Service Commission shall not concur under
 subsection (1) or subsection (2) in any action taken on the ground
 that a person who holds or has held the office of judge of the High
 Court, j udge of any Court of Appeal exercising jurisdiction in Kenya,
 Attorney-General or Controller and Auditor-General has been guilty of
 misbehaviour in that office unless he has been removed from that office
 by reason of his misbehaviour.
 (4) Before the Public Service Commission concurs under
 subsection (1) or subsection (2) in any action taken on the ground
 that a person who holds or has held any office to which, at the time of
 the action, section 69 applies has been guilty of misbehaviour in that
 office, the Public Service Commission shall consult the Judicial Service
 Commission.
 (5) In this section "pensions benefits" means any pensions,
 compensation, gratuities or other similar allowances for persons in
 respect of their service as public officers or for the widows, children,
 dependants or personal representatives of those persons in respect of
 that service.
 (6) For the purposes of this section an office shall be regarded as
 an office in the public service that is by virtue of section 112 (9) regarded
 as an office in the public service for the purposes of that section.
 CHAPTER IX
 TRUST LAND
 Interpretation of
 Chter.o o114. (1) Subject to this Chapter, the following descriptions of
 land are Trust land -
 (a) land which is in the Special Areas (meaning the areas of
 land the boundaries of which were specified in the First
 Cap. 288.           Schedule to the Trust Land Act as in force on 31 t May, 1963),
 and which was on 3111 May, 1963 vested in the Trust Land
 Board by virtue of any law or registered in the name of the
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Trust Land Board;
 (b) the areas of land that were known before 1I June, 1963
 as Special Reserves, Temporary Special Reserves, Special
 Leasehold Areas and Special Settlement Areas and the
 boundaries of which were described respectively in the
 Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Schedules to the Crown
 Lands Ordinance as in force on 311t May, 1963, the areas  Cap. 280.
 of land that were on 3111 May, 1963 communal reserves by
 virtue of a declaration under section 58 of that Ordinance,
 the areas of land referred to in section 59 of that Ordinance
 as in force on 311 May, 1963 and the areas of land in respect
 of which a permit to occupy was in force on 31 'May, 1963
 under section 62 of that Ordinance; and
 (c) land situated outside the Nairobi Area (as it was on 12h
 December, 1964) the freehold title to which is registered in
 the name of a county council or the freehold title to which is
 vested in a county council by virtue of an escheat:
 Provided that Trust land does not include any estates,
 interests or rights in or over land situated in the Nairobi Area
 (as it was on 12h December, 1964) that on 31 tMay, 1963
 were registered in the name of the Trust Land Board under
 the former Land Registration (Special Areas) Ordinance.
 (2) In this Chapter, references to a county council shall, in relation
 to land within the areas of jurisdiction of the Taveta Area Council, the
 PokotArea Council, the MosopArea Council, the TinderetArea Council,
 the ElgeyoArea Council, the MarakwetArea Council, the BaringoArea
 Council, the Olenguruone Local Council, the Mukogodo Area Council,
 the Elgon Local Council, and the Kuria Local Council, be construed as
 references to those councils respectively.
 115. (1) All Trust land shall vest in the county council within Trustland to vestin
 whose area ofjurisdiction it is situated:                      county councils.
 Provided that there shall not vest in any county council by virtue
 of this subsection -
 (i) any body of water that immediately before 121 December,
 1964 was vested in any person or authority in right of the
 Government of Kenya; or
 (ii) any mineral oils.
 
 (2) Each county council shall hold the Trust land vested in it for
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Registration of
 individual titles to
 Trust land.
 
 Cap. 283,
 Cap. 284.
 
 Setting apart of Trust
 land by County
 councils.
 
 the benefit of the persons ordinarily resident on that land and shall give
 effect to such rights, interests or other benefits in respect of the land as
 may, under the African customary law for the time being in force and
 applicable thereto, be vested in any tribe, group, family or individual:
 Provided that no right, interest or other benefit under African
 customary law shall have effect for the purposes of this subsection so
 far as it is repugnant to any written law.
 (3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), provision may be made by
 or under an Act of Parliament enabling a person to be granted a right
 or interest to prospect for minerals or mineral oils on any area of Trust
 land, or to extract minerals or mineral oils from any such area, and the
 county council in which the land is vested shall give effect to that right
 or interest accordingly:
 Provided that the total period during which minerals or mineral
 oils may be prospected for on, or extracted from, any particular area
 of land by virtue of any grant or grants while the land is not set apart
 shall not exceed two years.
 (4) Subject to this Chapter, provision may be made by or under
 an Act of Parliament with respect to the administration of Trust land
 by a county council.
 116. (1) A county council may, in such manner and subject to
 such conditions as may be prescribed by or under anAct of Parliament,
 request that any law to which this subsection applies shall apply to an
 area of Trust land vested in that county council, and when the title to
 any parcel of land within that area is registered under any such law
 otherwise than in the name of the county council it shall cease to be
 Trust land.
 (2) The laws to which subsection (1) applies are -
 (a) the Land Consolidation Act and the Land Adjudication
 Act; and
 (b) any other law permitting the registration of individual titles
 to estates, interests or rights in or over land that, immediately
 before registration, is Trust land (except so far as the law
 permits the registration of estates, interests or rights vested
 in persons or authorities for whose use and occupation the
 land has been set apart under this Chapter).
 117. (1) Subject to this section, an Act of Parliament may
 empower a county council to set apart an area of Trust land vested in
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 that county council for use and occupation -
 (a) by a public body or authority for public purposes; or
 (b) for the purpose of the prospecting for or the extraction of
 minerals or mineral oils; or
 (c) by any person or persons for a purpose which in the
 opinion of that county council is likely to benefit the persons
 ordinarily resident in that area or any other area of Trust land
 vested in that county council, either by reason of the use to
 which the area so set apart is to be put or by reason of the
 revenue to be derived from rent in respect thereof,
 and the Act of Parliament may prescribe the manner in which and the
 conditions subject to which such setting apart shall be effected.
 (2) Where a county council has set apart an area of land in
 pursuance of this section, any rights, interests or other benefits in respect
 of that land that were previously vested in a tribe, group, family or
 individual under African customary law shall be extinguished.
 (3) Where a county council has set apart an area of land in
 pursuance of this section, it may, subject to any law, make grants or
 dispositions of any estate, interest or right in or over that land or any
 part of it to any person or authority for whose use and occupation it
 was set apart.
 (4) No setting apart in pursuance of this section shall have effect
 unless provision is made by the law under which the setting apart takes
 place for the prompt payment of full compensation to any resident of
 the land set apart who -
 (a) under the African customary law for the time being in force
 and applicable to the land, has a right to occupy any part of
 the land; or
 (b) is, otherwise than in common with all other residents of
 the land, in some other way prejudicially affected by the
 setting apart.
 (5) No right, interest or other benefit under African customary
 law shall have effect for the purposes of subsection (4) so far as it is
 repugnant to any written law.
 Setting apart of Trust
 118. (1) Where the President is satisfied that the use and land for purposes of
 occupation of an area of Trust land is required for any of the purposes Government, etc.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 specified in subsection (2), he may, after consultation with the county
 council in which the land is vested, give written notice to that county
 council that the land is required to be set apart for use and occupation
 for those purposes; and the land shall then be set apart accordingly
 and there shall be vested in the Government of Kenya or in such other
 person or authority referred to in subsection (2) as may be specified in
 the written notice, such estates, interests or rights in or over that land
 or any part of it as may be specified in the written notice.
 (2) The purposes for which Trust land may be set apart under
 this section are -
 (a) the purposes of the Government of Kenya;
 (b) the purposes of a body corporate established for public
 purposes by an Act of Parliament;
 (c) the purposes of a company registered under the law relating
 to companies in which shares are held by or on behalf of the
 Government of Kenya;
 (d) the purpose of the prospecting for or the extraction of
 minerals or mineral oils.
 (3) This section shall apply to land that has already been set apart
 in pursuance of section 117 as it applies to other land, and in that case
 a setting apart under this section shall extinguish any estate, interest
 or right in or over the land or any part thereof that may be vested in
 any person or authority in consequence of the setting apart under that
 section, but section 75 shall apply in relation to the setting apart under
 this section as if it were a compulsory acquisition by the Government
 of Kenya under an Act of Parliament of the estate, interest or right so
 extinguished.
 (4) Where land is set apart under this section -
 (a) any rights, interests or other benefits in respect of that
 land that were previously vested in any tribe, group,
 family or individual under African customary law shall be
 extinguished; and
 (b) the Government of Kenya shall make prompt payment of
 full compensation for the setting apart to such persons as
 under section 117 (4) are entitled to compensation when
 land is set apart in pursuance of that section.
 (5) Subject to this section, Parliament may prescribe the manner
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 in which and the conditions subject to which a setting apart under this
 section shall be effected.
 119. Where the President is satisfied that any land that has been
 set apart under section 118 is no longer required for any of the purposes
 specified in that section, the President shall in writing so notify the
 county council in whose area of jurisdiction the land is situated, and
 thereupon the setting apart shall cease to have effect and any estate,
 interest or right vested in any person or authority in consequence of
 the setting apart shall be extinguished and (without prejudice to the
 subsequent making of a further setting apart under any provision of
 this Chapter) the land shall again be held by the county council in
 accordance with section 115:
 Provided that, where an estate, interest or right that is vested in a
 person or authority other than the Government of Kenya is extinguished
 in pursuance of this section, section 75 (except paragraphs (a) and (b) of
 subsection (1) thereof) shall apply to that extinguishment as if it were a
 compulsory acquisition by the Government of Kenya under an Act of
 Parliament of the estate, interest or right so extinguished.
 120. (1) Where a person in whom there is vested an estate, interest
 or right in or over land to which this section applies dies intestate and
 without heirs, that estate, interest or right shall escheat to the county
 council in whose area of jurisdiction the land is situated.
 (2) Where a company in which there is vested any estate, interest
 or right in or over land and to which this section applies is dissolved,
 then, except so far as provision is made by the law relating to companies
 for the vesting of that estate, interest or right in some other person
 or authority, it shall escheat as if it were vested in a person who dies
 intestate and without heirs.
 (3) The land to which this section applies is the land, other than
 land that is situated in the Nairobi Area (as it was on 12' December,
 1964), that is specified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of section 114
 (1).
 CHAPTER X
 GENERAL
 121. (1) A person who is appointed, elected or otherwise selected
 to an office established by or under this Constitution may resign from
 that office by writing under his hand addressed to the person or authority
 by whom he was appointed, elected or otherwise selected:
 
 Land no longer
 required for purposes
 of Government. etc.
 
 Escheat of rights in
 former Trust land.
 
 Resignations.
 
 Provided that -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (i) the resignation of a person from the office of President
 shall be addressed to the National Assembly;
 (ii) the resignation of a person from the office of Speaker
 or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly shall be
 addressed to the Assembly;
 (iii) the resignation of a person from the office of member of
 the National Assembly or from the office of chairman or
 member of a committee of the National Assembly shall
 be addressed to the Speaker of the Assembly.
 (2) The resignation of a person from an office as aforesaid shall
 take effect when the writing signifying the resignation is received by
 the person or authority to whom it is addressed or a person authorized
 by that person or authority to receive it.
 Reappointments       122. (1) Where a person has vacated an office established by
 and concurrent  or under this Constitution, he may, if qualified, again be appointed,
 appointments   elected or otherwise selected to hold that office in accordance with
 this Constitution.
 (2) Where this Constitution vests in a person or authority the
 power to make an appointment to an office (other than the office of
 Vice-President or Minister), a person may be appointed to that office,
 notwithstanding that some other person may be holding that office, when
 that other person is on leave of absence pending the relinquishment of
 the office; and where two or more persons are holding the same office
 by reason of an appointment made in pursuance of this subsection,
 then, for the purposes of any function conferred upon the holder of that
 office, the person last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder
 of the office.
 Interpretation.
 7of 1982. s. 9,      123. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
 7 of 1984. s. 6,  requires-
 12 of 1991. s. 7,
 6 o f 1992, s. 11.  "the Commonwealth" means Kenya, a country to which section
 95 applies and a dependency of any such country;
 "district" means one of the districts into which Kenya is divided
 in the manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament;
 "the East African Community" means the East African
 Community established by Article I of the Treaty for East African
 Co-operation signed on 6h June, 1967, and includes the corporations
 specified in Article 71 of that Treaty and the East African Development
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Bank established by Article 21 of that Treaty;
 "financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on
 30th June or on such other day as Parliament may prescribe;
 "Kenya" means the territory comprised in Kenya on 12h
 December, 1963 and the territorial waters of Kenya as for the time
 being defined by an Act of Parliament;
 "local authority" means a municipal, county, town or urban
 council, or a council for any other area, established by or under an Act
 of Parliament;
 "oath" includes affirmation;
 "the oath of allegiance" means an oath of allegiance as may be
 prescribed by Parliament;
 "person" includes a body of persons corporate or
 unincorporate;
 "political party" means a political party which is duly registered
 under any law which requires political parties to be registered, and which
 has complied with the requirements of any law as to the constitution
 or rules of political parties nominating candidates for the National
 Assembly;
 "province" means one of the provinces into which Kenya is
 divided in the manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament;
 "public officer" means a person holding or acting in an office in
 the public service;
 "the public service" includes the public service at any time before
 121h December, 1963;
 "session" means the period beginning when the National Assembly
 first sits after 11t' December, 1963 or after Parliament is prorogued or
 dissolved at any time and ending when Parliament is prorogued or is
 dissolved without having been prorogued;
 "sitting" means, in relation to the National Assembly, a period
 during which the Assembly is sitting without adjournment and includes
 any period during which it is in committee;
 "subordinate court" means a court of law in Kenya other than -
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (a) the High Court;
 (b) a court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from the High
 Court; or
 (c) a court-martial;
 "writing" includes printing and any other mode of reproducing
 words in a visible form.
 (2) Except where the context otherwise requires, any powers
 conferred upon Parliament by this Constitution to establish, provide
 for or prescribe any matter or thing shall be exercisable by Act of
 Parliament.
 (3) For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not be
 regarded as holding an office by reason only of the fact that he is in
 receipt of a pension or other similar allowance.
 (4) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, a
 reference to the holder of an office by the term designating his office
 shall be construed as including, to the extent of his authority, a reference
 to any person for the time being authorized to exercise the functions
 of that office.
 (5) Where this Constitution confers a power or imposes a duty,
 then, unless the contrary intention appears, the power may be exercised
 and the duty shall be performed from time to time as occasion arises.
 (6) Subject to this Constitution, any provision in this Constitution
 that vests in a person or authority the power to remove a public officer
 from his office shall be without prejudice to the power of a person or
 authority to abolish an office or to any law providing for the compulsory
 retirement of public officers generally or any class of public officers on
 attaining an age specified therein.
 (7) Where this Constitution vests in a person or authority the
 power to appoint a person to act in or to exercise the functions of an
 office if the holder thereof is himself unable to exercise those functions,
 no such appointment shall be called in question on the grounds that the
 holder of the office was not unable to exercise those functions.
 (8) No provision of this Constitution that a person or authority
 shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or
 authority in the exercise of any functions under this Constitution shall be
 construed as precluding a court from exercising jurisdiction in relation
 to any question whether that person or authority has exercised those
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 functions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.
 (9) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires -
 (a) words importing the masculine gender shall include
 females;
 (b) words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in
 the plural shall include the singular.
 (10) Where an order, regulation or rule, or any amendment or
 revocation thereof, made under a power conferred by this Constitution
 comes into operation on a particular day, it shall come into operation
 at the beginning of that day.
 (11) Where a power is conferred by this Constitution to make
 an order, regulation or rule or pass a resolution or give a direction or
 make a declaration or designation, the power shall be construed as
 including the power, exercisable in the same manner and subject to the
 same conditions, if any, to amend or revoke the order, regulation, rule,
 resolution, direction, declaration or designation.
 (12) A reference in this Constitution to a law made before
 12h December, 1963 shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be
 construed as a reference to that law as it had effect on 11Ih December,
 1963.
 (13) A reference in this Constitution to a law that amends or
 replaces another law shall be construed as including a reference to a law
 that modifies, re-enacts, with or without amendment or modification,
 or makes different provision in place of that other law.
 CHAPTER XI
 TRANSITORY
 124. This Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding the foregoing Effect of Chapter.
 provisions of this Constitution, and accordingly, if any such provision
 is inconsistent with a provision of this Chapter, the provision of this
 Chapter shall prevail.
 Appeals in respect
 125. (1) This section shall have effect for the purpose of enabling of certain decisions
 an officer to whom this section applies or his personal representatives affecting pensions
 to appeal against any of the following decisions -             benefits.
 (a) a decision of the Public Service Commission to give
 such concurrence as is required by section 113 (1) or (2) in
 relation to the refusal, withholding, reduction in amount or
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 suspending of any pensions benefits in respect of such an
 officer's service as a public officer;
 (b) a decision, whether of a Commission established by this
 Constitution or some other person or authority, to remove
 such an officer from office if the consequence of the removal
 is that any pensions benefits cannot be granted in respect of
 the officer's service as a public officer; or
 (c) a decision, whether of a Commission established by this
 Constitution or some other person or authority, to take
 some other disciplinary action in relation to such an officer
 if the consequence of the action is, or in the opinion of the
 Commission or other person or authority taking the decision
 might be, to reduce the amount of any pensions benefits
 that may be granted in respect of the officer's service as a
 public officer.
 (2) In the following provisions of this section, references to the
 Commission shall be construed -
 (a) in relation to a decision referred to in subsection (1) (a), as
 references to the Public Service Commission;
 (b) in relation to a decision referred to in subsection (1) (b) or
 (c), being a decision taken by a Commission established by
 this Constitution, as references to that Commission; and
 (c) in relation to a decision referred to in subsection (1) (b) or
 (c), being a decision taken by some other person or authority,
 as references to that person or authority.
 (3) The Commission shall cause to be delivered to the officer
 concerned, or to his personal representatives, a written notice of a
 decision referred to in subsection (1), stating the time, not being less
 than fourteen days from the date on which the notice is delivered, within
 which he, or his personal representatives, may apply to the Commission
 for the case to be referred to an Appeals Board.
 (4) If application is duly made within the time stated in the notice,
 the Commission shall notify the President in writing of that application
 and thereupon the President shall appoint an Appeals Board consisting
 of-
 (a) one member, who shall not be a member of the Commission,
 selected by the President;
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 (b) one member selected by an association representative of
 public officers or by a professional body, nominated in either
 case by the applicant; and
 (c) one member selected by the two other members jointly
 (or, in default of agreement between those members, by the
 Judicial Service Commission) who shall be the chairman
 of the Board.
 (5) The Appeals Board shall inquire into the facts of the case,
 and for that purpose -
 (a) shall hear the applicant if he so requests in writing and
 shall consider any representations that he wishes to make
 in writing;
 (b) may hear any other person who, in the opinion of the Board,
 is able to give the Board information on the case; and
 (c) shall have access to and shall consider all documents that
 were available to the Commission and shall also consider any
 further document relating to the case that may be produced
 by or on behalf of the applicant or the Commission.
 (6) When the Appeals Board has completed its consideration of
 the case, then -
 (a) if the decision that is the subject of the reference to the
 Board is a decision referred to in subsection (1) (a), the Board
 shall advise the Commission whether the decision should be
 affirmed, reversed or modified and the Commission shall act
 in accordance with that advice; and
 (b) if the decision that is the subject of the reference to the
 Board is a decision referred to in subsection (1) (b) or (c),
 the Board shall not have power to advise the Commission
 to affirm, reverse or modify the decision but -
 (i) where the officer has been removed from office the Board
 may direct that there shall be granted all or any part of
 the pensions benefits that, under any law, might have
 been granted in respect of his service as a public officer
 if he had retired voluntarily at the date of his removal
 and may direct that any law with respect to pensions
 benefits shall in any other respect have effect as if he
 had so retired; and
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 Compulsory
 retirement to
 facilitate appointment
 of local candidates
 
 (ii) where some other disciplinary action has been taken
 in relation to the officer the Board may direct that there
 shall be adopted with respect to the calculation of any
 pensions benefits that, under any law, may be granted in
 respect of his service as a public officer such measures
 as the Board may specify in order to off-set all or any
 part of the reduction in the amount of the benefits that,
 in the opinion of the Board, would or might otherwise
 be a consequence of the disciplinary action,
 and any direction given by the Board under this paragraph
 shall be complied with notwithstanding the provisions of
 any other law.
 (7) In this section the expression "pensions benefits" has the
 meaning assigned to it in section 113.
 (8) This section applies to an officer who holds a pensionable
 office in the public service and-
 (a) is designated under the Overseas Service Aid Scheme; or
 (b) is a member of Her Majesty's Overseas Civil Service or Her
 Majesty's Overseas Judiciary; or
 (c) whose conditions of service include an entitlement to
 free passages from East Africa for the purpose of leave of
 absence, other than sabbatical leave, upon the completion
 of a tour of duty.
 126. (1) If the President so requests, the authorities having power
 to make appointments in any branch of the public service shall consider
 and report to the President whether there are more candidates belonging
 to Kenya (hereinafter referred to as "local candidates") who are suitably
 qualified for appointment to, or promotion in, that branch than there
 are vacancies in that branch that could appropriately be filled by the
 local candidates; if those authorities report to the President that such
 is the case, the authority having power to remove from office persons
 holding office in that branch (in this subsection and in subsection (2)
 referred to as "the nominating authority") shall, if so requested by
 the President, select officers to whom this section applies who are
 serving in that branch and whose retirement would, in the opinion of
 the nominating authority, cause vacancies that could appropriately be
 filled by such suitably qualified local candidates as are available and
 fit for appointment and inform the President of the number of officers
 so selected; if the President specifies a number of officers to be called
 upon to vacate their appointments (not exceeding the number of officers
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 so selected), the nominating authority shall nominate that number of
 officers from among the officers so selected and the provisions of
 subsections (2), (3), and (4) shall apply in the case of any officer so
 nominated.
 (2) The nominating authority shall report the name of the officer
 to the chairman of the Public Service Commission who in turn shall
 circulate that name to the authority having power to make appointments
 in any branch of the public service in which the officer is eligible for
 appointment; and each such authority shall then consider whether there
 is any vacancy to which it is willing to appoint the officer.
 (3) If an authority indicates to the chairman of the Public Service
 Commission that it is willing to appoint the officer to fill a vacancy the
 officer shall be so informed and that appointment shall be made, but
 without prejudice to the right of the officer to retire voluntarily from
 the public service in the manner provided by any law:
 Provided that where more than one authority is willing to appoint
 the officer to fill a vacancy, the Public Service Commission shall decide
 which vacancy he shall be appointed to fill.
 (4) If no authority is willing to appoint the officer to fill a vacancy,
 the chairman of the Public Service Commission, shall by notice in
 writing so inform him and require him to retire from the public service,
 and he shall retire accordingly.
 (5) A notice given under subsection (4) requiring an officer to
 retire from the public service shall-
 (a) in the case of an officer who, when he receives the notice,
 is on leave of absence upon the completion of a tour of duty,
 specify the date on which he shall so retire which shall be
 not earlier than the expiration of six months from the date
 when he receives the notice or, if his leave of absence would
 otherwise expire later, when it would otherwise expire;
 and
 (b) in the case of any other officer, specify the period, which
 shall be not less than six months from the date when he
 receives the notice, at the expiration of which he shall
 proceed upon leave of absence pending retirement:
 Provided that the officer may agree to the notice specifying an
 earlier date or, as the case may be, a shorter period.
 (6) In determining the date or the period to be specified in
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 pursuance of subsection (5) in a notice given to an officer, the chairman
 of the Public Service Commission shall act in accordance with the advice
 of the authority that nominated that officer under subsection (1).
 (7) This section applies to an officer who holds a pensionable
 office in the public service and -
 (a) is designated under the Overseas Service Aid Scheme; or
 (b) is a member of Her Majesty's Overseas Civil Service or Her
 Majesty's Overseas Judiciary; or
 (c) whose conditions of service include an entitlement to free
 passages from EastAfrica for the purpose of leave of absence,
 other than sabbatical leave, upon the completion of a tour
 of duty; or
 (d) is an overseas officer who, after 11I December, 1963, is
 appointed to any office in the public service (otherwise than
 on promotion or transfer from another such office) and who
 is notified at the time of his appointment that this section
 will apply to him.
 (8) In this section "overseas officer" means an officer in the public
 service who is, either individually or as a member of a class, declared
 by the appropriate Commission to be an overseas officer, and "the
 appropriate Commission" means -
 (a) in relation to an officer who can be removed from his office
 by the Judicial Service Commission, that Commission;
 and
 (b) in any other case, the Public Service Commission.
 North-Eastern
 Province and         127. (Repealed by 6 of 1992, s. 12).
 contiguous Districts.
 6 of 1992. s. 12.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 SUBSIDIARY LEGISLATION
 Orders under section 35 (6)
 These are of temporary duration and are not reproduced here.
 Rules under section 75 (3)
 These apply to the Land Acquisition Act (Cap. 295) and are
 included in that Chapter.
 Orders under section 85 (1)
 THE CONSTITUTION (PUBLIC SECURITY) ORDER
 1. This Order may be cited as the Constitution (Public Security)
 Order.
 2. The following provisions of Part III of the Preservation of L.N. 222/1978,
 Public Security Act are brought into operation generally, namely Cap. 57.
 y 10 of 1997.
 subsection (1) of section 4 so far as it relates to the matters specified in
 paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of that section.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 
 Citation.
 
 Originating notice of
 motion.
 
 THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA
 IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 65(3) and
 section 84(6) of the Constitution of Kenya, the Chief Justice makes
 the following Rules:-
 THE CONSTITUTION OF KENYA (SUPERVISORY
 JURISDICTION AND PROTECTION OF
 FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS OF
 THE INDIVIDUAL) HIGH COURT PRACTICE AND
 PROCEDURE RULES, 2006.
 1. These Rules may be cited as the Constitution of Kenya
 (Supervisory Jurisdiction and Protection of Fundamental Rights and
 Freedoms of the Individual) High Court Practice and Procedure Rules,
 2006.
 PART I - SUPERVISORY JURISDICTION
 2. Unless a matter is specifically provided for under section 67
 or section 84 of the Constitution or any other law, a party who wishes
 to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 65 of the
 Constitution, shall do so by way of Originating Notice of Motion
 (hereinafter referred to as "the Motion")
 
 Form of Motion.       3. The Motion shall be as set out in Form A in the Schedule to
 these Rules.
 
 Content of Motion.
 Motion to be placed
 before judge.
 Court may move on
 its own motion.
 
 Reference to the
 High Court by
 subordinate court on
 its own
 
 4. The Motion shall state the concise grounds for the application,
 and shall be supported by the applicant's affidavit.
 5. Upon the filing of the Motion, the Registrar shall place the
 motion before a judge for directions within seven days from the date
 of filing.
 6. The High Court may in exercise of the powers conferred by
 Section 65(2) of the Constitution move on its own motion.
 PART II: INTERPRETATIVE JURISDICTION
 7. Where a question as to the interpretation of the Constitution
 arises in proceedings in a subordinate court and the court is of the
 opinion that the question involves a substantial question of law, the
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 court may refer the question to the High Court in Form B set out in
 the Schedule to these rules.
 8. Where a party to proceedings in a subordinate court alleges
 that there is a question as to the interpretation of the Constitution and
 the court is of the opinion that it involves a substantial question of law,
 the party shall informally request the presiding officer of that court to
 refer the question to the High Court and the court shall do so in Form
 C in the Schedule to these rules.
 9. The court shall in either case state concisely the issues and its
 opinion in Form B and Form C and shall within fourteen days refer
 the question to the High Court.
 10. Upon receipt of the reference, the Registrar shall within seven
 days place the matter before the Chief Justice to constitute a bench in
 accordance with the provisions of section 67(3) of the Constitution,
 unless there is an interlocutory matter in the reference, in which case
 the Registrar shall place the matter before a judge for determination.
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 motion.
 Reference to the
 High Court by
 subordinate court
 upon request by
 parties.
 Subordinate court to
 state issues and its
 opinion.
 Registrar to place
 reference before
 Chief Justice or
 judge.
 
 PART III - ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION
 
 11. Where contravention of any fundamental rights and freedoms
 of an individual under sections 70 to 83 (inclusive) of the Constitution
 is alleged or is apprehended an application shall be made directly to
 the High Court.
 12. An application under rule 11 shall be made by way of a petition
 as set out in Form D in the Schedule to these Rules.
 13. The petition under rule 12 shall be supported by an
 affidavit.
 
 Contravention of
 fundamental rights
 and freedoms.
 Form of petition.
 Petition to be
 supported by
 affidavit.
 
 14. If a party wishes to rely on any document, the document shall Documents to be
 be annexed to the supporting affidavit,                                     annexed to affidavit.
 
 15. The petition shall, in a criminal case, be served on the
 Attorney-General and in a civil case, on the respondent, within seven
 days of filing.
 16. The Attorney-General or the respondent, as the case may be,
 shall within fourteen days of service of the petition, respond by way
 of a replying affidavit and if any document is relied upon, it shall be
 annexed to the replying affidavit.
 17. A petitioner who wishes to file a further affidavit shall do so
 within seven days of service of the replying affidavit.
 
 Petition to be served.
 Replying affidavit.
 Further affidavit.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 Fixing Petition for
 hearing by the court.
 Written submissions.
 Fixing Petition for
 hearing by petitioner.
 
 18. (1) Within seven days from the date of service of the response
 or further affidavit, whichever is the later, the Registrar shall place the
 matter before a judge for fixing a hearing date or directions.
 (2) The Judge may in giving directions require that parties file
 and serve written submissions.
 19. Where the Attorney-General or the respondent, as the case may
 be, fails to respond within the time stipulated in rule 16, the petitioner
 may set down the matter for hearing and determination.
 
 Conservatory or      20. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules, a judge
 interim Orders.  before whom a petition under rule 12 is presented may hear and
 determine an application for conservatory or interim orders.
 
 Application to be by
 chamber summons.
 Setting aside.
 Constitutional issues
 in a matter before the
 High Court
 Reference to the
 High Court by
 subordinate court on
 its own motion
 Informal application
 to the presiding
 officer.
 Court to frame
 question.
 
 21. An application under rule 20 shall be by chamber summons
 supported by an affidavit and may be heard ex parte.
 22. A person affected by an order under rule 20 may apply to set
 aside such order.
 23. Where a constitutional issue arises in a matter before the High
 Court, the court seized of the matter may treat such issue as a preliminary
 point and shall hear and determine the same.
 24. Where in proceedings in a subordinate court a question
 arises as to the contravention of any of the provisions of sections 70
 to 83 (inclusive) of the Constitution, and the presiding officer is of the
 opinion that the question raised is not frivolous or vexatious, he may
 refer the question to the High Court in Form E set out in the Schedule
 to these Rules.
 25. Where a party to proceedings in a subordinate court alleges
 contravention of his fundamental rights or freedoms under sections
 70 to 83 (inclusive) of the Constitution in relation to himself, he shall
 apply informally to the presiding officer during the pendency of the
 proceedings that a reference be made to the High Court to determine
 the question of the alleged violation.
 26. If the presiding officer is satisfied that there is merit in the
 allegation made under rule 24, and that it has not been made frivolously
 or vexatiously, he shall grant the application whereupon the court shall
 frame the question to be determined by the High Court in Form F set
 out in the Schedule to these Rules.
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 27. As soon as is practicable, and in any case not later than twenty
 one days from the date of framing the question, the subordinate court
 shall refer the matter to the High Court.
 28. The Registrar shall within seven days of receipt of the
 reference under rule 25 place the matter before a judge to fix a hearing
 date or give further directions.
 29. The High Court may on an application by a party order that
 all further proceedings before the subordinate court shall be stayed
 pending the hearing and determination of the reference.
 30. At the hearing of a reference only the questions framed in
 Form F shall be raised.
 31. Where a party intends to rely on any reported or unreported
 case, or to quote from any book, he shall lodge with the court, and serve
 copies of the reported or unreported case or the quotation, as the case
 may be, two days before the hearing.
 32. The hearing of all applications and references to the High
 Court shall be given priority over all other cases and shall be heard and
 determined expeditiously.
 33. The High Court may upon an informal application immediately
 following the delivery of judgment or ruling grant a stay for fourteen
 days pending appeal.
 34. An appeal from the decision of the High Court to the Court
 of Appeal under section 84(7) of the Constitution shall be governed by
 the Court of Appeal Rules.
 35. The Constitution of Kenya (Protection of Fundamental Rights
 and Freedoms of the Individual) Practice and Procedure Rules, 2001
 are revoked.
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 Subordinate court to
 refer matter to High
 Court.
 Registrar to place
 matter before judge.
 Stay of proceedings.
 Question for
 determination.
 Authorities for the
 hearing
 Applications and
 references to be
 given priority.
 Stay pending appeal.
 Court of Appeal
 Rules to apply.
 Revocation of L.N.
 133 of 2001.
 
 36. (1) Any matter currently pending in court under Legal Notice Transitional
 No. 133 of 2001 shall be continued under these rules.            Provisions.
 (2) Any party affected by the operation of Legal Notice No. 133
 of 2001 shall be at liberty to apply to the High Court.
 
 Made on the 16th February, 2006.
 
 J.E.Gicheru.
 Chief Justice
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 (r.3.)                                               SCHEDULE
 Form A
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT .............................
 CONSTITUTIONAL APPLICATION NO ....... OF ............
 IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 65
 BETWEEN
 A.B. (insert names of parties) ................... APPLICANT
 AND
 C.D. (insert names of parties) ................. RESPONDENT
 ORIGINATING NOTICE OF MOTION
 TAKE NOTICE that on the ......... day of ...... 20 ....... at ....
 O'clock
 in the forenoon or so soon thereafter as can be heard, the above
 applicant/counsel for the applicant will move the Court for an
 O rder  that  ............................................................................ . .
 ...................................................................................................
 State  the  concise  grounds .............................................................
 ....................................................................................................
 The application is supported by the annexed affidavit of
 sworn on the ............... day of ................ 20 ......
 The address for service of the applicant is ...................................
 DATED    this  ...................... day  of  .............................  20 ........
 SIGNED     ....................................... Applicant/Advocate for
 applicant
 DRAWN AND FILED BY:
 TO BE SERVED UPON:
 Form B
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT .............................           (r. 7)
 CONSTITUTIONAL REFERENCE NO ....... OF ............
 IN THE MATTER OF SECTION 67
 IN THE MATTER OF CRIMINAL/CIVIL CASE NO .......... OE .......
 AT  ....................... COURT
 BETWEEN
 A.B. (insert names of parties) .................. APPLICANT
 AND
 C.D. (insert names of parties) ................. RESPONDENT
 To: The High Court of Kenya;
 Question(s) for Interpretation of the Constitution by the High Court
 pursuant to Section 67 of the Constitution.
 1. On the ......... day of ............ 20.... a question(s) as to the interpretation of the
 Constitution arose.
 2 ...... (briefly set out the opinion of the subordinate court on the point of law
 raised)
 3 ...... (briefly set out the facts necessary to enable the High Court to properly
 decide the point of law raised)
 4. The question(s) for the decision of the High Court is ..... (state the question(s).
 DATED   this  ...................... day  of  .............................   20 ........
 Magistrate/Presiding Officer
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006       Form C
 (r. 8)
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT .............................
 CONSTITUTIONAL REFERENCE NO ....... OF ............
 IN THE MATTER OF SECTION 67
 IN THE MATTER OF CRIMINAL/CIVIL CASE NO .......... OE .......
 AT  ....................... COURT
 BETWEEN
 A.B. (insert names of parties) ................... APPLICANT
 AND
 C.D. (insert names of parties) ................. RESPONDENT
 To: The High Court of Kenya;
 Question(s) for Interpretation of the Constitution by the High
 Court pursuant to Section 67(1) of the Constitution.
 1. On the ......... day of ............ 20.... a question(s) as to the
 interpretation of the Constitution arose.
 2. The parties contend as follows ........... (set out, in
 consecutive paragraphs the specific issues contended by
 each of the parties referring where necessary to Acts or
 decided cases.) ........
 3 ...... (briefly set out the opinion of the subordinate court on
 the point of law raised)
 4 ...... (briefly set out the facts necessary to enable the High
 Court to properly decide the point(s) of law raised)
 5. The question(s) for the decision of the High Court is .....
 (state the question(s).
 DATED   this  ...................... day  of  .............................  20 ........
 
 Magistrate/Presiding Officer
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 Form D                                                                         (r. 12)
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT .............................
 PETITION NO ....... OF ................ 20 .....
 IN THE MATTER OF SECTION 84(1)
 IN THE MATTER OF ALLEGED CONTRAVENTION OF
 FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS UNDER
 SECTIO   N  (insert section)  ............................................
 BETWEEN
 A.B. (insert names of parties) ................... PETITIONER
 AND
 C.D. (insert names of parties) ................. RESPONDENT
 TO:
 The High Court of Kenya
 The humble petition of A.B (insert names of petitioner) of ...........
 in  the  Republic  of Kenya  is as follows-. .........................................
 ............................. (the allegations upon which the petitioner(s)
 rely must be concisely set out, in consecutively numbered
 p a rag rap hs)  ................................................................................
 Your Petitioner(s) therefore humbly pray(s) that .........................
 (set out exact Order(s) sought) ...................................................
 Or that such other Order(s) as this Honourable Court shall deem
 just.
 DATED    at .................. this  ................. day  of  .................  20 ......
 Signed ............................... Petitioner/Advocate for the Petitioner
 DRAWN & FILED BY:
 TO BE SERVED UPON:
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 116
 
 LN No 6 of 2006  Form E
 (r. 24)
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT .............................
 CONSTITUTIONAL REFERENCE NO ....... OF ............
 IN THE MATTER OF SECTION 84(3)
 IN THE MATTER OF ALLEGED CONTRAVENTION OF
 FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS UNDER
 SECTIO  N  (insert section)  ............................................
 IN THE MATTER OF CRIMINAL/ CIVIL CASE NO .............. OF .................
 AT  ................................. CO U RT
 BETWEEN
 A.B. (insert names of parties) .................. APPLICANT
 AND
 C.D. (insert names of parties) ................. RESPONDENT
 To The High Court of Kenya;
 Question(s) for determination on the alleged contravention
 of Section(s) ......................... of the Constitution of Kenya.
 1. On the ......... day of ............ 20 .... a question(s) arose as to the
 contravention of section(s) ........... of the Constitution.
 2 ...... (briefly set out the opinion of the subordinate court on the
 question raised)
 3 ...... (briefly set out the facts necessary to enable the High Court to properly
 decide the question(s) raised.)
 4. The question(s) for determination by the High Court is ..... (state
 the question(s).
 DATED   this  ...................... day  of  .............................  20 ........
 Magistrate/ Presiding Officer
 
 
 Constitution of Kenya
 
 LN No 6 of 2006
 Form F                                                              (r. 26)
 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT .............................
 CONSTITUTIONAL REFERENCE NO ....... OF ............
 IN THE MATTER OF SECTION 84(3)
 IN THE MATTER OF ALLEGED CONTRAVENTION OF FUNDAMENTAL
 RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS UNDER
 SECTION   (insert section)  ............................................
 IN THE MATTER OF CRIMINAL/CIVIL CASE NO .......... OE .......
 AT  ....................... COURT
 BETWEEN
 A.B. (insert names of parties) ................. APPLICANT
 AND
 C.D. (insert names of parties) ................. RESPONDENT
 To: The High Court of Kenya;
 Question(s) for determination of the alleged contravention of
 Section(s) ............... of the Constitution of Kenya.
 1. On the ......... day of ............ 20.... a question(s) arose as to the contravention
 of section(s) ..... of the Constitution.
 2. The parties contend as follows ........... (set out, in consecutive paragraphs
 the specific issues contended by each of the parties referring where
 necessary to Acts or decided cases.) ........
 3 ...... (briefly set out the opinion of the subordinate court on the
 question raised)
 4 ...... (briefly set out the facts necessary to enable the High Court to
 properly decide the question(s) raised).
 5. The question(s) for determination of the High Court is ..... (state the
 question(s).
 DATED   this  ...................... day  of  .............................   20 ........
 Magistrate/Presiding Officer
 
 
 
</pre>
