<pre>
 Niger
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of
 NIGER'
 November 8, 1960
 PREAMBLE
 The people of Niger proclaims its attachment to the principles of democ-
 racy and the Rights of Man as defined by the Declaration of the Rights of
 Man and the Citizen of 1789, by the Universal Declaration of 1948 and as
 they are guaranteed by this Constitution.
 It affirms its wish to co-operate in peace and friendship with all peoples
 who share its ideal of justice, liberty, equality, fraternity and human
 solidarity.
 TITLE I
 THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. The State of Niger is an independent and sovereign Republic.
 The national emblem is the tricolor flag composed of three horizontal
 stripes whose colors, from top to bottom, are orange, white and green.
 The middle stripe shall have an orange disc in its center.
 The motto of the Republic is "Fraternity, work, progress."
 The official language is French.
 Art. 2. The Republic of Niger is indivisible, secular, democratic and
 social.
 Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the
 people.
 Art. 3. Sovereignty belongs to the people.
 No section of the people nor any individual may usurp the exercise
 this right.
 Art. 4. The people shall exercise its sovereignty through its repre-
 sentatives and by means of referendum. The conditions for recourse to a
 referendum shall be stipulated by law.
 1 Bipublique du Niger. Constitution. 8 Novembre 1960. Imprimerie J. L. Fontanon,
 Nianiey. Supplied by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Translated by the Editor.
 
 578
 
 
 The Supreme Court shall ensure the regularity of the operation of the
 referendum and shall proclaim its results.
 Art. 5. Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret.
 All Nigerian citizens of both sexes who have reached their majority
 and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the conditions
 to be determined by law.
 Art. 6. The Republic shall ensure to all equality before the law without
 distinction of origin, race, sex or religion.
 The Republic shall respect all beliefs.
 Any particularist propaganda of a racial or ethnic character and any
 manifestation of racial discrimination shall be punished by law.
 Art. 7. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the ex-
 pression of the suffrage. They shall be formed and shall carry on their
 activities freely on condition that they respect the principles of national
 sovereignty and democracy and the laws of the Republic.
 TITLE II
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC AND THE
 GOVERNMENT
 Art. 8. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State. He
 shall embody national unity. He shall uphold respect for the Constitution.
 He shall ensure the continuity of the State. He shall be the guarantor of
 national independence, of the integrity of the territory, and of respect for
 international treaties and agreements.
 Art. 9. The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years by
 universal direct suffrage. He shall be eligible for re-election.
 Art. 10. The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute
 majority on the first ballot. If this is not obtained, the President of the
 Republic shall be elected on a second ballot, taking place fifteen days
 after the first, by a relative majority.
 Convocation of the voters shall be by decree taken in the Council of
 Ministers.
 The first balloting for the election of the President of the Republic shall
 take place on the same day as that fixed for the general elections.
 These elections shall take place twenty days at the least and fifty days
 at the most before the expiration of the powers of the incumbent President
 and Legislature.
 A law shall determine the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility, the
 filing of candidacies, the voting procedure, the counting and proclamation
 of the results. The Supreme Court shall ensure the regularity of these
 operations.
 Art. 11. In the event that the Presidency of the Republic has been
 
 Niger
 
 579
 
 
 vacated by decease, resignation or absolute impediment, the functions of
 the President of the Republic shall be temporarily exercised by a person
 chosen from the body of the Assembly by its President.
 If the duration of the presidential term still to run is equal to or less
 than twelve months, there shall be no election to the presidency of the
 Republic. The President appointed by the President of the Assembly
 shall become, without need of sanction, President of the Republic with the
 rank, powers and prerogatives attaching to this title.
 If the duration of the presidential term still to run is greater than
 twelve months, new presidential elections shall take place. The term of
 the new President of the Republic shall expire at the same time as the
 powers of the National Assembly.
 Art. 12. The President of the Republic shall be the sole holder of the
 executive power.
 He shall appoint the members of the Government and assign their
 powers. Members of the Government shall be responsible to him. He shall
 terminate their functions.
 Art. 13. The President of the Republic shall have the right to initiate
 legislation together with the members of the National Assembly.
 He shall ensure the promulgation of the laws within fifteen days follow-
 ing their transmission to him by the President of the National Assembly.
 This time limit may be reduced to five days in cases of emergency attested
 by the National Assembly. Failing promulgation within these time limits,
 the President of the National Assembly shall proceed thereto.
 The President of the Republic may, before these time limits expire,
 ask the National Assembly for a second reading of the law or of certain
 of its articles. This second reading may not be refused. He may also,
 within the same time limits, ask that this second reading not take place
 before the next ordinary session following the one during which the text
 was adopted in first reading. This may not be refused.
 Voting upon the second reading shall be by a majority of two thirds
 of the members of the National Assembly.
 Art. 14. The President of the Republic, with the agreement of the
 secretariat of the National Assembly, may submit to referendum any
 text seems to him to require direct consultation with the people.
 When a referendum has resulted in the adoption of a bill, the President
 of the Republic shall promulgate it within the time limits stipulated in the
 preceding article.
 Art. 15. The President of the Republic shall ensure the implementation
 of the laws and of the decisions of the judiciary. He shall issue the regu-
 lations applicable to the whole territory of the Republic.
 Art. 16. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors and
 Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers; Ambassadors and Envoys Ex-
 traordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him.
 
 580
 
 Niger
 
 
 Art. 17. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Adminis-
 tration. He shall make appointments to the civil and military posts of the
 State.
 Art. 18. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Armed
 Forces.
 Art. 19. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of the
 nation, the integrity of its territory or the implementation of its inter-
 national undertakings are threatened in a clear and present danger, the
 President of the Republic shall take such exceptional measures as are
 required by the circumstances, with the agreement of the President of the
 National Assembly.
 He shall inform the nation by a message. The National Assembly shall
 meet by right.
 Art. 20. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.
 Art. 21. The President of the Republic shall determine and conduct
 the policy of the nation.
 Art. 22. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council
 of Ministers.
 The Council of Ministers must deliberate upon:
 - decisions which determine the general policy of the State.
 - Government bills;
 - ordinances and regulatory decrees;
 - appointments to the higher offices of the State the list of which shall
 be drawn up by law.
 Art. 23. Bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees, may be examined,
 before being submitted to the Council of Ministers, by the Supreme Court
 for its opinion.
 Art. 24. The President of the Republic may delegate certain of his
 powers to the Ministers.
 Art. 25. The functions of the President of the Republic and of members
 of the Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of any parlia-
 mentary mandate, of any public employment and of any professional
 activity.
 Art. 26. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the
 National Assembly either directly, or by means of messages which he
 shall cause to be read by the President of the National Assembly and
 which shall not be followed by any debate.
 TITLE III
 THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Art. 27. Parliament shall be composed of a single assembly called the
 National Assembly, whose members shall bear the title of deputies.
 
 Niger
 
 581
 
 
 Art. 28. The National Assembly shall pass the laws and vote taxation.
 Art. 29. Deputies to the National Assembly shall be elected by universal
 direct suffrage on a complete national list.
 The duration of the legislation shall be for five years.
 A law shall determine the number of members of the National Assembly,
 the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility, the offices incompatible with
 membership in the Assembly, the method of vote, the conditions under
 which new elections shall be organized in the case of vacancies in the
 seats of deputies.
 In case of dispute, the Supreme Court shall rule upon the eligibility
 of candidates.
 Art. 30. The National Assembly shall be the sole judge of the validity
 of the elections of its members. .
 Art. 31. Each year the National Assembly shall meet by right in two
 ordinary sessions.
 The first session shall begin on the last Wednesday in April and shall
 not exceed three months. The second session shall begin on the first
 Wednesday of October and shall end on the third Friday of December.
 Art. 32. The National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary
 sessions by its President to consider a specific agenda, at the request of
 the President of the Republic or of an absolute majority of the deputies.
 Extraordinary sessions shall be closed as soon as their agenda is exhausted.
 Art. 33. The President of the Assembly shall be elected for the duration
 of the legislature.
 Art. 34. An in extenso report of the debates shall be published in the
 Journal Officiel.
 The Assembly may sit in secret committee at the request of the Presi-
 dent of the Republic or of one third of its deputies.
 Art. 35. Each deputy shall represent the whole Nation. All binding
 instructions shall be null and void.
 The right to vote of deputies shall be personal. However, delegation of
 a vote shall be permitted when a deputy is absent because of sickness,
 in the accomplishment of an office or mission assigned to him by the
 Government or the Assembly, or to fulfil his military obligations. No
 one may be delegated more than one vote.
 Art. 36. No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or
 tried as a result of the opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise
 of his functions.
 Art. 37. No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for
 criminal or minor offenses without the authorization of the National
 Assembly except in flagrante delicto. When the Assembly is not in session,
 no deputy may be arrested, without the authorization of the Secretariat
 of the National Assembly, except in flagrante delicto, in the case of
 authorized prosecution, or of final conviction.
 
 582
 
 Niger
 
 
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 National Assembly so requests.
 Art. 38. The deputies shall receive an emolument the amount of which
 shall be fixed by law.
 Art. 39. The National Assembly shall draw up its own rules of pro-
 cedure.
 TITLE IV
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ASSEMBLY AND
 THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 40. Members of the Government shall have access to the com-
 missions of the National Assembly. They shall be heard at the request of
 the commissions. They may be assisted by Government commissioners.
 Section I. Respective Domains of Law and Regulation
 Art. 41. Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - citizenship, civil rights, and the fundamental guarantees granted to
 the citizens for the exercise of their public liberties;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts,
 inheritance and gifts;
 - the procedure by which customs shall be recorded and harmonized
 with the fundamental principles of the Constitution;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefore, criminal procedure, amnesty;
 - the organization of judicial and administrative tribunals and the
 procedure followed before them, the status of magistrates, of law
 officers and of assistants to the judiciary;
 - the basis, the rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all types;
 - the issuance of currency;
 - the electoral system of the National Assembly and the local assem-
 blies;
 - the establishment of categories of public institutions;
 - the general statute for the public service;
 - the general organization of the administration;
 - martial law and siege law.
 Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of:
 - the organization of the national defense;
 - education;
 - property rights, civil and commercial obligations;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security;
 - transfers and administration in the State sector;
 
 583
 
 Niger
 
 
 - benefit societies and savings;
 - the organization of production;
 - the system of transportation and telecommunications.
 The financial laws shall determine the financial resources and obli-
 gations of the State.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives of
 economic and social action of the State.
 Art. 42. The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war.
 Art. 43. Martial law shall be decreed in a meeting of the Council of Mini-
 sters. The National Assembly shall meet automatically if it is not in session.
 Prorogation of martial law beyond fifteen days may be authorized only
 by the National Assembly.
 Art. 44. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters existing prior to the entry
 into force of this Constitution may be modified by decree after consul-
 tation with the Supreme Court.
 Art. 45. The President of the Republic may, in order to carry out his
 program, ask the National Assembly to authorize him by law to take for
 a limited period through ordinances measures that are normally within
 the domain of law.
 These ordinances shall be enacted in meetings of the Council of Minis-
 ters, after consultation with the Supreme Court. They shall come into
 force upon their publication, but shall become null and void if the bill
 for their ratification is not filed with the National Assembly before the
 date set by the enabling act.
 At the expiration of the time limit referred to in the first paragraph
 of this Article, the ordinances may be modified only by law in those
 matters which are within the legislative domain.
 Art. 46. Bills and amendments which do not fall within the domain of
 law shall be inadmissible. Inadmissibility shall be pronounced by the
 President of the National Assembly.
 In case of dispute, the Supreme Court, at the request of the President
 of the Republic or of the President of the National Assembly, shall rule
 within a time limit of eight days.
 Section II. The drawing up of laws
 Art. 47. Bills and amendments introduced by deputies shall not be
 considered when their adoption would have as a consequence either a
 diminution of public resources or the creation or increase of public
 expenditures, unless they are accompanied by a proposal for revenues
 or economies to an equivalent amount.
 Art. 48. The discussion of Government bills shall pertain to the text
 
 584
 
 Niger
 
 
 presented by the Commission. The latter shall, at the request of the
 Government, inform the National Assembly of the points on which
 there is disagreement with the Government.
 Art. 49. Deputies shall have the right of amendment.
 Art. 50. The National Assembly shall pass finance bills under the
 conditions to be stipulated by law.
 Art. 51. The finance bill shall be filed with the National Assembly
 at the beginning of the October session. The finance bill must provide the
 revenues necessary wholly to cover the expenditures.
 The National Assembly shall vote the budget in balance.
 Should the National Assembly fail to reach a decision within seventy
 days after the bill has been filed, the provisions of the bill may be enforced
 by ordinance.
 The Government shall inform the National Assembly, convened in
 extraordinary session, for ratification within a time limit of fifteen days.
 Should the National Assembly fail to pass the budget by the end of
 this extraordinary session, the budget shall be definitely drawn up by
 ordinance.
 Should the finance bill not be filed in time for it to be promulgated
 before the beginning of the fiscal year, the President of the Republic shall
 immediately request the National Assembly for the authorization to
 continue the budget of the preceeding year on a basis of provisional
 monthly credits.
 Art. 52. The National Assembly shall settle the accounts of the Nation
 according to the methods provided in the Finance law.
 TITLE V
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
 Art. 53. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify inter-
 national treaties and agreements.
 Art. 54. Preace treaties, treaties or agreements relative to international
 organization, those that modify the internal laws of the State may be
 ratified only by a law.
 Art. 55. If the Supreme Court, the matter having been referred to it
 by the President of the Republic or by the President of the National
 Assembly, shall declare that an international commitment contains
 a clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify this
 commitment may be given only after amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 56. Treaties or agreements duly ratified shall, upon their publi-
 cation, have an authority superior to that of laws, subject, for each
 agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
 
 Niger
 
 585
 
 
 TITLE VI
 THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 57. The Supreme Court shall be composed of four chambers:
 the Constitutional Chamber, the Judicial Chamber, the Administrative
 Chamber and the Accounts Chamber.
 A law shall determine the composition, organization, powers and
 functioning of the Supreme Court.
 TITLE VII
 THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 58. Justice shall be rendered throughout the territory of the State
 in the name of the people.
 Art. 59. Judges shall, in the exercise of their functions, be subject only
 to the authority of the law.
 The President of the Republic shall be the guarantor of the inde-
 pendence of the judges. He shall be assisted by the High Council of the
 Judiciary.
 Art. 60. A law shall determine the composition, organization and
 functioning of the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 61. Judges shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on
 the proposal of the Minister of Justice with the advice of the High Council
 of the Judiciary.
 Art. 62. No one may be arbitrarily detained.
 Everyone shall be presumed innocent until his guilt has been established
 following a procedure which offers him the guarantees required for his
 defense. The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty, shall
 ensure respect for this principle under the conditions stipulated by law.
 TITLE VIII
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 63. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of deputies
 elected by the National Assembly from its midst after each general election.
 The High Court of Justice shall elect its President from among its members.
 A law shall determine the number of its members, its rules, and the
 procedure to be followed before it.
 Art. 64. The President of the Republic shall not be held accountable
 for actions performed in the exercise of his office nor summoned before
 the High Court except in case of high treason.
 
 586
 
 Niger
 
 
 The High Court shall be competent to try members of the Government
 for actions deemed to be crimes or misdemeanors performed in the exercise
 of their office, as well as to try their accomplices in case of conspiracy
 against the security of the State.
 Art. 65. Indictment of the President of the Republic and of members
 of the Government shall be by open vote and by a majority of two
 thirds of the deputies composing the National Assembly.
 Art. 66. The High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and
 misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties, as they are
 established by the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed.
 TITLE IX
 THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
 Art. 67. The Economic and Social Council shall give its opinion on
 Government bills, ordinances or decrees, as well as on parliamentary bills
 submitted to it.
 Any bill dealing with a plan of an economic or social character shall
 be submitted to it for its advice.
 The President of the Republic may consult the Economic and Social
 Council on any problem of an economic or social character.
 The composition of the Economic and Social Council and its rules of
 procedure shall be determined by law.
 TITLE X
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 68. The territorial units of the State shall be created by law. A
 law shall determine the fundamental principles of the free administration
 of the territorial units, their powers and their resources.
 TITLE XI
 ASSOCIATION AND CO-OPERATION BETWEEN
 STATES
 Art. 69. The Republic of Niger may conclude agreements of association
 with other states. The Republic of Niger is willing to create with other
 States intergovernmental organizations of common action, of co-ordination
 and of free co-operation.
 Art. 70. Such organizations may have as their objects in particular the
 following:
 - the harmonization of the monetary, economic and financial policies;
 - the establishment of custom unions;
 
 Niger
 
 587
 
 
 - the creation of joint funds;
 - the harmonization of development plans;
 - the harmonization of foreign policy;
 - taking common measures for national defense;
 - the co-ordination of judicial organization;
 - health co-operation and co-ordination;
 - co-operation in matters of higher education;
 - harmonization of rules relating to the status of the public service
 and the right to work;
 - co-ordination of transportation, communications and telecom-
 munications.
 TITLE XII
 AMENDMENT
 Art. 71. The President of the Republic and the members of the National
 Assembly alike have the right to initiate amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 72. A bill of amendment must, in order to be considered, receive
 the vote of a majority of three fourths of the members of the National
 Assembly.
 No amendment shall enter into force before it has been approved by
 referendum, except if the bill in questions has been approved by a majority
 of four fifths of the members of the Assembly.
 Art. 73. No procedure of amendment may be undertaken or pursued
 if it threatens the integrity of the territory. The republican form of
 Government may not be the subject of amendment.
 TITLE XIII
 GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 74. The provisions necessary to implement this Constitution shall
 be the subject of laws voted by the National Assembly.
 The present National Assembly shall be prolonged for five years from
 the date of the vote on the Constitution. The President of the Republic,
 Head of State, shall be elected for five years by the present National
 Assembly.
 Art. 75. The established authorities of the Republic shall continue to
 exercise their functions, and the existing institutions shall be maintained
 until the establishment of new authorities and institutions.
 Art. 76. The legislation presently in force in Niger shall continue to be
 applicable insofar as no new texts have been voted, and insofar as it is not
 contrary to this Constitution.
 Done a. Niamey, November 8, 1960
 
 588
 
 Niger
 
 
</pre>
