CONSTITUTIONAL ORDER NO. 11
 November 18, 1958
 In exercise of the powers conferred upon the Supreme Council for the
 Armed Forces by the Order of its President dated 17th November, 1958,
 the Council in its meeting on 18th November, 1958 has passed the
 following Constitutional Orders:
 1. The Sudan is a Democratic Republic and the sovereignty is vested
 in the People, and in the name of the People all legislation is issued.
 2. The Supreme Constitutional Authority in the Sudan is the Supreme
 Council for the Armed Forces.
 3. The Council delegates all its legislative, judicial and executive
 powers and the command of the Armed Forces to its President.
 CENTRAL COUNCIL ACT2
 November 13, 1962
 AnAct to provide for the creation of a National Central Council and vesting
 it with legislative powers in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
 In exercise of the powers conferred on him by Constitutional Order
 No. 1, the President of the Supreme Council for the Armed Forces hereby
 makes the following Act:
 1. This Act may be cited as the Central Council Act, 1962 and shall
 come into force upon approval and signature by the President of the
 Supreme Council for the Armed Forces.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
 words and expressions shall have the meanings hereby respectively
 assigned to them:
 (1) The Council: means the Central Council constituted under this Act.
 (2) The President: The President of the Supreme Council for the
 Armed Forces.
 (3) Year: means the Gregorian year.
 (4) Court of Law: Includes every Civil, Criminal,, Sharia Court, or Court
 ISupplied by the Greek Embassy, Khartoum. See footnote 1, page,845.
 2 1962 Act No. 29, supplied by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Khartoum.
 
Martial established by law in the Sudan, and every person or body of persons exercising judicial functions by virtue of any Act.
 (5) Province Council: means the Council constituted under the Provincial Administration Act, 1960.
 CHAPTER I
 LEGISLATURE
 3. There shall be constituted a Central Council and such Council and
 the President of the Supreme Council for the Armed Forces shall together
 constitute the Legislature for the Sudan.
 4. The Council shall be composed of seventy two-members, other than
 the Ministers, of whom fifty-four to be elected by the Province Councils
 and eighteen to be appointed by the President.
 5. A member of the Council shall be a Sudanese who is not less than
 30 years of age.
 6. Every member of the Council shall, before taking his seat, take an
 oath or make a declaration in the form set out in the Schedule hereto,
 before the Speaker, and, in the case of the Speaker, before the members
 of the Council.
 7. The following persons shall be disqualified from membership of the
 Council:
 (a) Persons who hold an office of profit under the Government of the
 Sudan, other than an office declared by the Council not to disqualify
 its holder.
 For the purposes of this section a person shall not be deemed to
 hold an office of profit under the Government of the Sudan by reason
 only that he is a Minister.
 (b) Undischarged bankrupts or persons whose property is subject
 to a composition or arrangement with creditors.
 (c) Persons who have within the past seven years been sentenced
 to a term of imprisonment for a period of not less than two years.
 (d) Persons who have within the past seven years been convicted
 of bankrupt practice or any abetment thereof at any Parliamentary,
 Central Council, or Local Government election.
 (e) Persons of unsound mind.
 (f) Illiterates.
 8. The seat of a member of the Council shall become vacant in any
 of the following events:
 (a) Upon his death.
 (b) If without leave of the Council he shall be absent from ten
 consecutive sittings of the Council.
  (c) If he shall become subject to any of the disqualifications specified
 in the preceding section.
 (d) If any other person is convicted of any corrupt practice carried
 out on his behalf or with his knowledge or connivance in respect
 of the election at which he was elected.
 (e) If he shall give to the Speaker of the Council written notice of
 his resignation from membership.
 9. (1) Whenever the seat of an elected member becomes vacant a
 fresh election shall be held by the Province Council concerned to fill the
 vacancy in accordance with the procedure appropriate to such seat.
 (2) Whenever the seat of an appointed member becomes vacant the
 vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the President.
 10. Any question which may arise as to the right of any person to be
 or remain a member of the Council, shall be referred to the Speaker who
 may determine the issue or if he thinks fit, submit the same to the Civil
 High Court for determination.
 11. (1) The Council shall be presided over by a Speaker.
 (2) The Speaker shall be elected by its members from amongst members
 or other persons qualified to be members of the Council.
 (3) If the Speaker is not an sitting member of the Council, he shall
 become a member thereof ex officio.
 (4) There shall be a Deputy Speaker elected by the Council from amongst
 its members. He shall preside at meetings of the Council in the absence
 of the Speaker.
 (5) The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker may, at any time by writing
 under his hand addressed, in the case of the Speaker, to the Deputy
 Speaker, and in the case of the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign
 his office; and may be removed from office by a resolution of the Council
 passed by a two thirds majority of all the then members of the Council.
 (6) The salaries to be paid to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall
 be such as may from time to time be fixed by the President.
 Provided that their salaries shall not be varied to their disadvantage
 during the term of their office.
 12. (1) The President shall appoint the date and place for the commence-
 ment of each session of the Council; provided that the Council shall be
 summoned by the President to meet twice at least in every year, and so
 that the commencement of a new session shall be appointed to take place
 within six months of the last sitting of the preceding session.
 (2) A session of the Council shall continue until determined by the
 President by prorogation or dissolution.
 13. Unless sooner dissolved, the Council shall continue for a period of
 two years from the beginning of its first session, or for such other period
 as may be necessary for the enactment of a new Constitution.
 14. Members of the Council who are also Ministers shall be entitledjudge to receive such salaries and allowances for their service as may be fixed
 by the President.
 15. Three fifths of the members of the Council shall constitute a
 quorum.
 16. Subject to the provisions of its Standing Orders, proceedings in the
 Council shall be conducted in Arabic, but without prejudice to such use
 of the English language as may be convenient.
 17. Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any Standing Orders
 made hereunder, there shall be freedom of speech in the Council, and no
 member thereof shall be liable to any proceedings in any Court in respect
 of anything said or of any vote given by him in the Council or any Com-
 mittee thereof.
 18. (1) Subject to the limitations in this Act, the Council shall be
 entitled to hold debates and pass resolutions on any subject.
 (2) Resolutions may, if the Council thinks fit, be submitted to the
 Council of Ministers for consideration.
 19. A member of the Council may, subject to its Standing Orders,
 address questions on any subject to the Council of Ministers or the Minister
 concerned.
 20. Every Minister shall be a member of the Council and shall have
 the right to speak in and other wise take part in the proceedings of the
 Council and any of its committees of which he may be appointed a member.
 21. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act all questions proposed for
 decision in the Council shall be determined by a majority of the votes
 of the members present and voting.
 (2) The Speaker shall have neither an original nor a casting vote.
 (3) If upon any question before the Council the votes are equally
 divided, the motion shall be deemed to be lost.
 22. The Speaker shall by order prescribe Standing Orders for the
 regulation and orderly conduct of the proceedings of the Council and the
 despatch of its business, including provision for the setting up of such
 standing, select, or other committees as may from time to time appear
 necessary or expedient; the Council may thereafter from time to time
 add to, amend, or revoke such Standing Orders.
 23. The validity of any proceedings in the Council shall not be called
 in question before any Court or other authority on the ground of any
 alleged irregularity of procedure.
 24. No treaty, agreement or, convention with any other country or
 countries or with any international or regional organization shall have
 effect in the Sudan unless ratified by the Council by law.
 25. (1) The President may, at his discretion at any time address the
 Council and may for that purpose require the attendance of members.
 (2) The President shall address the Council at the beginning of every
 session.
 
 850
 
 Sudan
 
 
 (8) The President may at his discretion at any time send a message
 to the Council and such message shall thereupon be considered by the
 Council with all convenient despatch.
 CHAPTER II
 LEGISLATION
 26. (1) Subject to the operation of section 36 hereof, legislation shall
 be initiated by bill or by provisional order.
 (2) A bill shall not become law unless it has been passed by the Council
 and has received the assent of the President. On receipt of such assent
 the bill shall become law as an Act.
 (8) If a Government bill is passed by the Council with amendments
 which are not acceptable to the Council of Ministers, the Council of
 Ministers may withdraw the bill.
 27. (1) If at any time when the Council is not sitting, the Council of
 Ministers shall resolve that the passing of any Government legislation is a
 matter of urgency, the Council of Ministers may make a provisional order
 enacting the same, and submit such order to the President for his assent.
 (2) On receipt of such assent, the Provisional order shall have the same
 force as an Act of the Council.
 (3) Every such order shall be submitted by the Council of Ministers as
 soon as practicable for confirmation or otherwise by the Council provided
 that such submission should take effect not later than in the following
 first session of the Council.
 (4) If the order be confirmed by resolution of the Council, it shall
 thereupon become an Act.
 (5) If the Council refuses to confirm the provisional order, the order
 shall forthwith lapse, and cease to have effect, but without prejudice
 to the right of the Council of Ministers to introduce a bill to the same or a
 similar effect.
 (6) Any enactment repealed or amended by a provisional order shall
 as from the date of the lapse of such order be revived and have effect as
 if such order had not been made.
 (7) The lapse of any such order shall not have retrospective effect.
 CHAPTER III
 FINANCE - PROPERTY - CONTRACTS - SUITS
 28. In this Chapter the expression "year" means the financial year,
 which shall be the 12 months ending on the 30th day of June in each
 calendar year.
 
 Sudan
 
 851
 
 
 29. The annual budget, which shall consist of estimates of revenue and
 of expenditure (other than expenditure from reserves) shall be prepared
 by the Minister of Finance and shall, when passed by the Council of
 Ministers be laid before the Council.
 30. (1) The proposals of the Council of Ministers for all such expenditure
 (other than expenditure hereinafter declared to be excepted expenditure),
 shall be submitted to the vote of the Council by means of an Appropriation
 Bill which shall contain estimates under appropriate heads for the several
 services required.
 (2) The following expenditure shall be excepted expenditure and shall
 not be submitted to the vote of the Council but shall be paid out of revenue
 namely:
 (a) Debt service charges for which the Sudan Government is liable
 by virtue of obligations incurred by it.
 (b) The salaries and allowances of the President and members of the
 Supreme Council for the Armed Forces and other expenditure
 relating to its office.
 (c) The salaries payable to members of the Judiciary.
 (d) The salaries payable to the members of the Public Service
 Commission.
 (e) The salary payable to the Auditor General.
 (3) The Council may assent or refuse its assent to any estimate included
 in the Appropriation Bill or may vote a lesser amount than that included
 therein but it may not vote an increased amount or an alteration in its
 destination.
 31. (1) The Council of Ministers may present to the Council by means
 of an Advance Appropriation Bill estimates of the amounts required
 to provide for the maintenance of government services from the first day
 of the financial year until the Appropriation Bill receives the President's
 assent.
 (2) Advance Appropriation Bills shall be dealt with in the same way
 as Appropriation Bills.
 32. (1) The Council of Ministers may present to the Council supple-
 mentary estimates of expenditure whenever:
 (a) the amount voted by the Council proves insufficient for the
 purpose of the current year, or
 (b) a need arises during the current year for expenditure, for which
 the vote of the Council is necessary, upon some new service not
 provided for in the budget for that year.
 (2) Supplementary estimates shall be dealt with in the same way as
 estimates, save only that if the Council is not then sitting the additional
 expenditure may in cases of urgency be authorised by provisional order.
 33. Whenever the Council of Ministers proposes to make allocation
 from revenue to Government reserves, or to make a transfer from one
 
 Sudan
 
 852
 
 
 reserve to another, it shall present to the Council a bill to cover such
 allocation to transfer; and such bill dealt with in all respects as an Ap-
 propriation Bill, save only that if the Council is not then sitting such
 allocation or transfer may in cases of urgency be authorized by provisional
 order. Provided that it shall not be necessary for the Council of Ministers
 to present a separate bill to the Council under this section for any allo-
 cation which has been included as expenditure in an Appropriation Bill
 or a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
 34. Whenever the Council of Ministers proposes to expend moneys
 to be charged to Government reserves, it shall present to the Council
 a bill to cover such expenditure, and such bill shall be dealt with in all
 respects as an Appropriation Bill, save only that if the Council is not
 then sitting, such expenditure may in cases of urgency be authorized
 by Provisional Order.
 35. Proposals for the imposition of new or the alteration or repeal of
 existing taxes shall be submitted to the vote of the Council by means of
 a bill. Provided that the Council of Ministers may, where in its opinion
 the public interest so requires, provide by Order in Council that any
 proposed new tax or alteration in or repeal of an existing tax shall come
 into operation on the day on which the bill is presented to the Council;
 but every such order shall be without prejudice to the right of the Council
 to vote in due course on any such proposal. An order made under this
 section may be revoked by the Council of Ministers and, unless sooner
 revoked, shall expire upon the coming into operation of the bill as an
 Act, or upon the rejection by the Council of the bill; but its revocation or
 expiration shall not have retrospective effect, and no revenue collected
 under such order shall in any event be repayable. Provided further that if
 the Council is not then sitting, any new tax or alteration to or repeal
 of an existing tax may in cases of urgency be authorized by provisional
 order.
 36. (1) No member of the Council shall introduce any bill, or move
 any amendment to a bill, having the object or effect of imposing or
 increasing any tax, or imposing any charge upon the revenue, or upon the
 Government reserves, save with the prior consent of the Minister of
 Finance. Provided that a bill or amendment shall not be deemed to have
 such object or effect by reason only that it includes provision for the
 imposition of fines or penalties, or for the payment of fees for licences or
 fees for services rendered.
 (2) A certificate by the Minister of Finance that a proposed bill has
 such object or effect shall be conclusive.
 37. (1) The final accounts of Government revenue and expenditure,
 including expenditure charged to reserves, for each year shall be laid
 before the Council by the Council of Ministers.
 (2) The Auditor-General shall submit his report on the accounts to
 
 Sudan
 
 853
 
 
 the Council at the same time as the accounts are laid before it, not later
 than 18 months from the end of the financial year.
 (3) If the accounts show that expenditure was incurred in excess of the
 appropriation made by the Council in respect of any head, the Council
 of Ministers shall present to the Council a bill to cover the excess, and such
 bill shall be dealt with in all respects as an Appropriation Bill.
 (4) If for any reason the Auditor-General is unable to submit his report
 within the period herein specified he shall render a report setting out the
 reasons for his inability to do so.
 38. The executive power of the Government of the Sudan, shall extend,
 subject to any law made by the Council, to the grant, sale, disposition or
 mortgage of any property held for the purpose of the said Government,
 and to the purchase or acquisition of property for those purposes, and to
 the making of contracts.
 39. All contracts made in the exercise of the executive power of the
 Government of the Sudan shall be expressed to be made by the said
 Government, and shall be executed by such persons and in -such manner
 as the Government may direct.
 40. All units and other legal proceedings instituted by or against any
 any department or official of the Government of the Sudan, relating to
 the performance of their official functions, shall be instituted in the name
 of the Government of the Sudan.
 CHAPTER IV
 THE AUDITOR-GENERAL
 41. There shall be an Auditor-General for the Sudan, who shall be the
 servant of and directly responsible to the President.
 42. (1) The Auditor-General shall be appointed by the President on
 the recommendation of the Council of Ministers and the approval of the
 Council.
 (2) The Auditor-General shall, before assuming his office take an oath
 or make a declaration before the President in the form set out in the-
 Schedule.
 43. (1) The Auditor-General shall perform such duties and exercise
 such powers in relation to the accounts of the Government of the Sudan
 and every department or board thereof as may be laid down by the
 Council by law; and until provision in that behalf is so made, shall perform
 such duties and exercise such powers as were conferred on or were exer-
 cisable by the Auditor-General by or under the Audit Ordinance 1933
 immediately before coming into force of this Act.
 (2) Any such law may confer on the Auditor-General similar duties
 and powers in relation to such other accounts as may be therein specified.
 
 854
 
 8udan
 
 
 44. (1) The Auditor-General shall not be removed from his office except
 by an order of the President or in pursuance of a recommendation to that
 effect passed by three-quarters majority of the Council.
 (2) On ceasing to hold office, an Auditor-General shall not be eligible
 for any employment under the Sudan Government.
 45. The salary and pension rights of the Auditor-General shall be such
 as may be laid down by the Council by law, and in the meantime shall
 be those in force' immediately before the commencement of this Act:
 provided that neither salary nor pension rights of the Auditor-General
 shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
 46. The reports of the Auditor-General relating to the accounts specified
 in section 37 shall be submitted to the Council.
 CHAPTER V
 GENERAL
 47. (1) No action or other legal proceeding whatsoever, whether civil
 or criminal, shall be instituted in any court of law for or on account
 of or in respect of any act, matter or thing done, whether within or without
 the Sudan, between the 17th day of November, 1958 and the passing of
 this Act, if done under the provisions of Constitutional Order No. 1 of
 1958 in good faith in the execution of his duty or for the public safety
 or in the enforcement of discipline or otherwise in the public interest by
 a person holding office in or employed in the service of the Armed Forces
 of the Sudan or the Supreme Council for the Armed Forces of the Sudan,
 in any capacity, whether military, naval, air force or civil, or by any other
 person acting under the authority of a person so holding office or so
 employed.
 Provided that this section shall not prevent:
 (a) the institution or prosecution of proceedings in respect of any
 right under or alleged breaches of contract, if the proceedings are
 instituted within one year from the passing of this Act;
 (b) the institution or prosecution of civil proceedings founded on
 negligence in respect of damage to person or property;
 (2) For the purposes of this section a certificate by a Government
 department that any act, matter or thing was done under the authority
 of a person so holding office or so employed as aforesaid and/or was done
 in the execution of a duty, shall be sufficient evidence of such authority
 or duty and of such act, matter or thing having been done thereunder, or in
 execution thereof, and any such act, matter or thing done by or under the
 authority of a person so holding office or so employed as aforesaid, shall
 be deemed to have been done in good faith, unless the contrary is proved.
 (3) Nothing in this section shall prejudice or prevent the institution or
 
 Sudan
 
 855
 
 
 856                             Sudan
 prosecution of proceedings for giving effect to a final judgment given
 before the passing of this Act by any court of final resort or by any other
 court when the judgment at the passing of this Act is not then the subject
 of a pending appeal.
 
 
</pre>
