<pre>
 lvory Coast
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 IVORY COAST'
 *       November 3, 1960, as amended January 11, 1963
 PREAMBLE
 The people of the Ivory Coast proclaims its attachment to the principles
 of democracy and the rights of man as defined by the Declaration of the
 Rights of Man and the Citizen of 1789, by the Universal Declaration of
 1948, and as they are guaranteed by this Constitution.
 . It.affirms its desire to co-operate in peace and friendship with all peoples
 who share its ideal of justice, liberty, equality, fraternity and human
 solidarity.
 TITLE I
 THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. The State of the Ivory Coast is an independent sovereign Re-
 public.
 The national emblem is the tricolor flag, orange, white, and green,
 in vertical stripes.
 The national anthem is the "Abidjanaise."
 The motto of the Republic is "Union, Discipline, Work."
 The official language is French.
 Art. 2. The Republic of the Ivory Coast is one and indivisible, secular,
 democratic and social.
 Its principle is government of the people, by the people, and for the
 people.
 Art. 3. Sovereignty belongs to the people. No section of the people,
 nor any individual may usurp the exercise of this right.
 Art. 4. The people shall exercise its sovereignty through its representatives and by means of referendum. The conditions of recourse to referendum shall be determined by law.
 The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of referendum
 operations and shall proclaim the results.
 Art. 5. Suffrage shall be universal, equal and secret.
 All Ivory Coast citizens of both sexes who have reached their majority and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the conditions to be determined by law.
 Art. 6. The Republic shall ensure equality before the law to all without
 distinction of origin, race, sex or religion. It shall respect all beliefs.
 Any particularist propaganda of a racial or ethnic character, as well
 as any manifestation of racial discrimination shall be punished by law.
 Art. 7. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the expression of the suffrage. They shall be formed freely and shall carry on
 their activities freely, on condition that they respect the principles of
 national sovereignty and democracy and the laws of the Republic.
 TITLE II
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
 AND THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 8. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of State. He
 shall embody national unity. He shall watch over the respect of the
 Constitution. He shall ensure the continuance of the State. He shall be
 the guarantor of national independence, of the integrity of the territory
 and of respect for treaties and international agreements.
 Art. 9. The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years
 by universal direct suffrage. He shall be eligible for reelection.
 Art. 10. The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute
 majority on the first ballot. If this is not obtained, the President of the
 Republic shall be elected on a second ballot, which shall take place fifteen
 days after the first ballot, by a relative majority.
 The voting shall begin at the summons of the Government.
 The first ballot for the election of the President of the Republic shall
 take place on the same day as that fixed for the general elections.
 These elections shall take place twenty days at the least and fifty
 days at the most before the expiration of the powers of the incumbent,
 President and legislature.
 A law shall establish the conditions of eligibility, of the presentation
 of candidatures, of the balloting, counting and proclamation of the results.
 The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of these operations.
 Art. 11. In the event that the presidency of the Republic has been
 vacated by death or resignation, or has been impeded in its functioning,
 
 Ivory Coast
 
 243
 
 
 the functions of President of the Republic shall be exercised temporarily
 by a person chosen by the President of the National Assembly from among
 its members.
 If the presidential term still to run is equal to or less than twelve months
 there shall be no new elections to the Presidency of the Republic. The President appointed by the President of the National Assembly shall automatically assume the rank, powers and prerogatives of President of the
 Republic.
 If the Presidential term still to run is more than twelve months, new
 elections shall take place. The term of the new President of the Republic
 shall expire at the same time as that of the National Assembly.
 Art. 12. The President of the Republic shall be the sole holder of the
 executive power.
 He shall appoint the members of the Government and decide upon their
 powers. Members of the Government shall be responsible to him. He shall
 terminate their functions.
 Art. 13. The President of the Republic and the members of the National
 Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 He shall promulgate the laws within fifteen days of their transmission
 to him by the President of the National Assembly.
 This time limit may be reduced to five days in cases of urgency so
 declared by the National Assembly.
 He may, before the expiration of this time limit, ask the National Assembly for a second reading of the law or certain of its articles. This
 second reading may not be refused.
 He may also, within the same time limit, request that the second reading
 not take place until the next ordinary session following the session at
 which the text was adopted in the first reading. This request may not be
 refused.
 To be adopted at the second reading, a law must be passed by a majority
 of two thirds of the members of the National Assembly.
 Art. 14. The President of the Republic, with the agreement of the
 secretariat of the National Assembly, may submit to a referendum any
 text which seems to him to require direct consultation with people.
 When the referendum decides in favor of the bill, the President of the
 Republic shall promulgate it within the time limit stipulated in the pre-
 ceding article.
 Art. 15. The President of the Republic shall ensure the implementation
 of the laws and of decisions of the judicial authority. He shall issue the
 regulations applicable to the whole territory of the Republic.
 Art. 16. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors and
 Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers. Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary of foreign powers shall be accredited to him.
 Art. 17. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Administration. He shall make the civil and military appointments of the
 State.
 Art. 18. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Armed
 Forces.
 Art. 19. When the institution of the Republic, the independence of the
 nation, the integrity of its territory of the fulfillment of its international commitments are threatened by a clear and present danger, the
 President of the Republic shall take the exceptional measures required
 by these circumstances, after obligatory consultation with the President
 of the National Assembly.
 He shall inform the nation of these measures in a message.
 The National Assembly shall meet automatically.
 Art. 20. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon.
 Art. 21. The President of the Republic shall determine and conduct
 the policy of the nation.
 Art. 22. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council
 of Ministers.
 The Council of Ministers must deliberate:
 - decisions determining the general policy of the State;
 - government bills;
 - ordinances and regulatory decrees;
 - appointments to the higher offices of the State the list of which
 shall be drawn up by law.
 Art. 23. Bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees may be examined by
 the Supreme Court for their advice before being submitted to the Council
 of Ministers.
 Art. 24. The President of the Republic may delegate certain of his
 powers to the Ministers.
 Art. 25. The functions of the President of the Republic and of member
 of the Government shall be incompatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, any public employment or any professional activity.
 Art. 26. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the
 National Assembly either directly or by messages which he shall cause
 to be read by the President of the National Assembly. These communications may not be followed by any debate.
 TITLE III
 THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Art. 27. Parliament shall comprise a single assembly, called the National
 Assembly, whose members shall bear the title of deputies.
 Art. 28. The National Assembly shall pass the laws and agree to the
 taxation.
 
Art. 29. Deputies to the National Assembly shall be elected by universal
 direct suffrage from a complete national list.
 The term of the legislature shall be five years.
 A law shall determine the number of members of the National Assembly,
 the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices incompatible
 with membership, the method of voting and the conditions under which
 new elections shall take place in cases of vacancies in the seats of deputies.
 In case of dispute, the Supreme Court shall rule on the eligibility of
 candidates.
 Art. 30. The National Assembly shall be sole judge of the validity
 of the elections of its members.
 Art. 31. The National Assembly shall convene automatically in two
 ordinary sessions a year.
 The first session shall begin on the last Wednesday of April and may
 not exceed three months.
 The second session shall begin on the first Wednesday of October and
 shall end on the third Friday of December.
 Art. 32. The National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary
 session by its President, at the request of the President of the Republic
 or of an absolute majority of the deputies to consider a specific agenda.
 Extraordinary sessions shall be closed as soon as their agenda is exhausted.
 Art. 33. The President of the National Assembly shall be elected for
 the duration of the legislature.
 Art. 34. A full report of the debates shall be published in the Journal
 Officiel.
 The National Assembly may sit in secret committee at the request of
 the President of the Republic or of one third of the deputies.
 Art. 35. Each deputy shall represent the entire nation.
 All binding instructions on deputies shall be null and void.
 The right to vote of deputies shall be personal. However, the delegation
 of a vote shall be permitted when a deputy is absent because of sickness,
 to execute a mandate or mission assigned by the Government or the
 National Assembly, or to fulfill his military obligations. No one may be
 delegated more than one vote.
 Art. 36. No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or
 tried as a result of the opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise
 of his functions.
 Art. 37. No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for
 criminal or minor offenses without the authorization of the National
 Assembly except in flagrante delicto. No deputy may, when parliament is
 not in session, be arrested without the authorization of the secretariat of
 the National Assembly, except in flagrante delicto, cases of authorized
 prosecution or of final conviction.
 
 246
 
 Ivory Coast
 
 
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 National Assembly so requires.
 Art. 38. Deputies shall receive an emolument the amount of which
 shall be established by law.
 Art. 39. The National Assembly shall draw up its rules of procedures.
 TITLE IV
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE NATIONAL
 ASSEMBLY AND THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 40. The members of the Government shall have access to the
 commissions of the National Assembly. They shall be heard at the
 request of the commissions.
 They may be assisted by Government Commissioners.
 Section I. Respective Domains of Laws and Regulations
 Art. 41. Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - citizenship, civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to
 the citizens for the exercise of their public liberties;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts,
 inheritance and gifts;
 - the procedure whereby customs shall be ascertained and harmonized
 with the fundamental principles of the Constitution;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefore; criminal procedure, amnesty;
 - the organization of judicial and administrative tribunals and the
 procedure to be followed before them, the status of magistrates, of
 law officers and of assistants to the judicial authority;
 - the basis, the rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all types;
 - the issuance of currency;
 - the electoral system of the National Assembly and the local assemblies;
 - the establishment of categories of public institutions;
 - the general status of the public service;
 - the general organization of the Administration:
 - martial law and siege law.
 Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of:
 - the organization of the National Defense;
 - education;
 - property rights, civil and commercial obligations;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social institutions;
 - nationalization and the administration of the State domain;
 - benefit societies and savings;
 - the organization of production;
 - the system of transportation and telecommunications.
 The financial laws shall determine the financial resources and obligations
 of the State.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives
 of the economic and social action of the State.
 Art. 42. The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war.
 Art. 43. Martial law shall be decreed in a meeting of the Council of
 Ministers. The National Assembly shall meet by right if it is not already
 1n session.
 The prorogation of martial law beyond fifteen days may be authorized
 only by the National Assembly.
 Art. 44. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character.
 Legislative tests concerning these matters existing prior to the entry
 in force of this Constitution may be modified by decree taken with the
 advice of the Supreme Court.
 Art. 45. The President may, in order to carry out his program, ask the
 National Assembly to authorize him, by law and for a limited period,
 to take through ordinances measures that are normally within the domain
 of law.
 These ordinances shall be enacted in meetings of the Council of Ministers
 after consultation where necessary with the Supreme Court. They shall
 come into force upon their publication, but shall become null and void
 if the bill for their ratification is not submitted to the National Assembly
 before the date set by the enabling act.
 At the expiration of the time limit referred to in the first paragraph
 of the present article the ordinances may be modified only by law in those
 matters which are within the legislative domain.
 Art. 46. Bills and amendments which do not fall within the domain
 of law shall be inadmissible. Inadmissibility shall be pronounced by the
 President of the National Assembly.
 In case of dispute, the Supreme Court, to whom the matter shall have
 been referred by the President of the Republic or by the President of the
 National Assembly, shall rule within a period of eight days.
 Section II. The Drawing Up of the Laws
 Art. 47. Bills and amendments introduced by deputies shall not be
 considered when their adoption would have as a consequence either a
 diminution of public financial resources or the creation or increase of
 public expenditures, unless they are accompanied by a proposal for
 revenues or economies to an equivalent amount.
 
 248
 
 Ivory Coast
 
 
 Art. 48. The discussion of Government bills shall pertain to the text
 presented by the commission.
 The commission, at the request of the Government, must inform the
 National Assembly of the point on which it disagrees with the Govern-
 ment.
 Art. 49. Deputies have the right of amendment.
 Art. 50. The National Assembly shall pass the finance bill under the
 conditions to be stipulated by law.
 Art. 51. The finance bill shall be filed with the National Assembly
 at the opening of the October session. The finance bill must provide the
 revenues necessary fully to cover expenditures.
 The National Assembly shall vote the budget in balance.
 Should the National Assembly fail to reach a decision within seventy
 days from the day the bill has been filed, the provisions of the bill may
 be put into force by ordinance.
 The Government shall inform the National Assembly, convened in
 extraordinary session for ratification, within a time limit of fifteen days.
 Should the National Assembly fail to pass the budget by the end of the
 extraordinary session, it shall be put into force definitively by ordinance.
 Should the finance bill not be filed in time for it to be promulgated
 before the beginning of the fiscal year, the President of the Republic shall
 immediately ask the National Assembly for authorization to continue
 the budget of the preceeding year by provisional monthly credits..
 Art. 52. The National Assembly shall administer the accounts of the
 nation in accordance with the forms prescribed by the finance law.
 TITLE V
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL
 AGREEMENTS
 Art. 53. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties
 and international agreements.
 Art. 54. Peace treaties, treaties and agreements relative to international
 organization those that modify the internal laws of the State may be
 ratified only by a law.
 Art. 55. If the Supreme Court, the matter having been referred to it,
 by the President of the Republic or by the President of the National
 Assembly, shall declare that an international commitment contains a
 clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify it may be
 given only after amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 56. Treaties or agreements duly ratified and approved shall, upon
 their publication, have an authority superior to that of laws, subject,
 for each agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
  
 Ivory Coast
 
 TITLE VI
 THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 57. The Supreme Court shall include four chambers; the Constitutional Chamber; the Judicial Chamber, the Administrative Chamber,
 and the Chamber of Accounts.
 A law shall determine the composition, organization, powers and procedure of the Supreme Court.
 TITLE VII
 THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 58. Justice shall be rendered on the territory of the State in the
 name of the people.
 Art. 59. In the exercise of their functions judges shall be subject only
 to the authority of the law.
 The President of the Republic shall be the guarantor of the independence
 of the judges.
 He shall be assisted by the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 60. A law shall determine the composition, organization and
 procedure of the High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 61. Magistrates shall be appointed by the President of the Republic
 upon the proposal of the Minister of Justice and with the advice of the
 High Council of the Judiciary.
 Art. 62. No one may be arbitrarily detained.
 The accused shall be presumed innocent until his guilt is established as
 a result of a procedure which provides him with the guarantees necessary
 for his defense. The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty,
 shall ensure respect for this principle under the conditions stipulated by
 law.
 TITLE VIII
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 63. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of deputies
 elected by the National Assembly from among its members after each
 general election. It shall elect its President from among its members.
 A law shall determine the number of members, the rules and the
 procedure to be followed before it.
 Art. 64. The President of the Republic shall not be held accountable
 
 250
 
 
 for actions performed in the exercise of his office except in the case of
 high treason.
 The High Court of Justice shall be competent to try members of the
 Government for actions performed in the exercise of their office and
 deemed to be crimes or misdemeanors, with the exception of crimes and
 misdemeanors against the security of the State and those related thereto.
 Art. 65. Indictment of the President of the Republic and of members
 of the Government shall be passed by open balloting and a majority
 of two thirds of the deputies to the National Assembly.
 Art. 66. The High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes
 and misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties as they
 are established by the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed.
 TITLE IX
 THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
 Art. 67. The Economic and Social Council shall give its opinion on
 government bills, ordinances and decrees, as well as on parliamentary
 bills submitted to it.
 Any bill dealing with a plan of an economic or social character shall be
 submitted to it for its advice.
 The President of the Republic may consult the Economic and Social
 Council on any problem of an economic or social nature.
 The composition of the Economic and Social Council and its rules of
 procedure shall be determined by law.
 TITLE X
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 68. The territorial units of the Republic shall be created by law.
 A law shall determine the fundamental principles of the free adminis-
 tration of the territorial units, their powers and their resources.
 TITLE XI
 ASSOCIATION AND CO-OPERATION
 BETWEEN STATES
 Art. 69. The Republic of the Ivory Coast may conclude agreements
 of association with other States.
 It agrees to create intergovernmental organizations with other States
 of common administration, co-ordination and free co-operation.
 
 251
 
 Ivory Coast
 
 
 Art. 70. Such organizations may have in particular the following pur-
 poses:
 the harmonization of monetary, economic and financial policy;
 - the establishment of customs unions;
 - the creation of mutual funds;
 - the harmonization of development plans;
 - the harmonization of foreign policy;
 - the establishment of common measures to ensure national defense;
 - the co-ordination of judicial organization;
 - co-operation in matters of higher education;
 - health co-operation and co-ordination;
 - harmonization of rules concerning the status of Government service
 and the right to work;
 - co-ordination of transportation, communications and telecommuni-
 cations.
 TITLE XII
 AMENDMENT
 Art. 71. The President of the Republic and the members of the National
 Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate amendment of the Consti-
 tution.
 Art. 72. In order for it to be taken under consideration, a bill of
 amendment must be passed by a majority of three fourths of the members
 of the National Assembly.
 No amendment shall enter into force before it has been approved by
 referendum except when it has been approved by a majority of four
 fifths of the members of the National Assembly.
 Art. 73. No amendment procedure may be undertaken or pursued if it
 threatens the integrity of the territory.
 The republican form of the Government may not be the subject of
 amendment.
 TITLE XIII
 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND TRANSITIONAL
 PROVISIONS
 Art. 74. The National Assembly shall pass laws containing the necessary
 provisions for the application of this Constitution.
 The President of the Republic shall take office and the National Assembly shall meet on December 12, 1960, at the latest.
 Art. 75. The established authorities of the Republic shall continue their
 functions and the existing institutions shall be maintained until the
 establishment of new authorities and institutions.
 Art. 76. The legislation presently in force in the Ivory Coast shall
 remain applicable except where new texts are drawn up, insofar as it is
 not contrary to this Constitution.
 Done at Abidjan, November 3, 1960
 
 
</pre>
