<pre>
 Decree 5 of 1971.
 
 THE CONSTITUTION (MODIFICATION) DECREE.
 A Decree To Modify The Constitution, To Make Provision
 To Change The Designation Of The Military Head Of
 State, To Provide For The Functions Of Ministers
 And For Other Purposes Connected Therewith.
 1. It is hereby declared that with effect from  the date Change of
 designation
 of the coming into force of this Decree, the designation of Military
 "Military Head of State" shall be changed to "President".     ead of
 to President.
 2. (1) The President shall be Head of State, Head of President.
 Military Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
 Forces of Uganda.
 (2) The President shall take precedence over all
 persons in Uganda and shall not be liable to any proceedings
 whatsoever in any court.
 (3) The President shall be exempt from direct
 personal taxation.
 (4) The salary, allowances and gratuity payable to
 the President and any pension or other allowances payable
 to him on retirement are hereby charged upon the Consoli-
 dated Fund.
 3. (1) The President may appoint Ministers and Deputy Appoint-
 Ministers.                                                    menit of
 and Deputy
 (2) The office of a Minister or of a Deputy Minister, Ministers.
 appointed under this article, shall become vacant,
 (a) if the holder of the office resigns;
 (b) if the President so directs;
 (c) at the first sitting of the National Assembly after
 a General Election.
 4. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 67 of the Functions
 Constitution a Minister shall be responsible for such functions of Ministers
 and Deputy
 of the Government of Uganda including responsibility for Ministers.
 any Ministry of the Government as the President may, by
 directions in writing, assign to him.
 (2) Where any Minister has been charged with
 responsibility for any Ministry, he shall be responsible for
 the administration of that Ministry and shall exercise direc-
 tion and control of that Ministry and in the discharge of his
 functions under this article, he shall be responsible to the
 Cabinet.
 
 
 (3) A Deputy Minister shall assist such Minister as
 the. President may specify in the performance of that.Minister's
 functions under this article.
 Attorney-      5. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General who shall be a
 General.  Minister of the Government appointed by the President.
 (2) The Attorney-General shall be the principal legal
 adviser to the Government and responsible to the Govern-
 ment for matters of policy relating to the administration of
 justice.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the
 Attorney-General shall represent Uganda in all legal proceed-
 ings and shall, on behalf of Uganda, exercise or perform any
 of her rights, prerogatives, privileges or functions before any
 court and shall perform such other functions as may be
 conferred on him by the President.
 (4) The office of the Attorney-General shall become
 vacant,
 (a) if the holder of the office resigns; or
 (b) if the President so directs;
 (c) at the first sitting of the National Assembly after
 a General Election.
 The Cabinet.   6. The Council of Ministers established by article 5 of
 the Proclamation of the 2nd February, 1971, shall be known
 and referred to as "the Cabinet".
 Consequen-    7. (1) A reference in any written law to "the Military
 tial
 amend-    Head of State" shall be construed as a reference to "the
 ments of  President".
 the written
 law.             (2) Subsection (1) of section 2 of the Interpretation
 De97le 3 of Act (Modification) Decree is hereby repealed.
 commence-      8. This Decree shall be deemed to have come into force
 ment.     on the 2nd day of February, 1971.
 MADE under my hand and the Public Seal, this 12th day
 of March, 1971.
 GENERAL IDI AMIN DADA,
 Military Head of State, Head of Government and
 Commander - in - Chief of the Armed Forces.
 
 Date of publication : 13th March, 1971.
 
 
</pre>
