<pre>
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC of the CONGO (BRAZZAVILLE)'
 December 8, 1963
 PREAMBLE
 The Congolese people solemnly proclaims the permanence of the spirit
 which ruled its revolution of August 18, 14 and 15, 1963.
 It rejects, as a consequence:
 - any corruption, tribalism, or nepotism, as methods of Government
 or of consolidation of dictatorship and personal power;
 - any racial or religious discrimination.
 It reaffirms its attachment to the principles of national sovereignty
 and to the Universal Declaration of December 10, 1948.
 It proclaims its will to safeguard respect and guarantees for:
 - political liberties;
 - trade union liberties;
 - the right to strike;
 - the rights and liberties of the human person, the family and local
 units;
 - philosophic and religious liberties;
 - freedom of the press;
 - the right of property;
 economic and social rights.
 It proclaims its attachment to the principles of self-determination and
 the free will of peoples.
 Desirous of preparing the way for African unity, it shall spare no effort
 to attain this end.
 The Congolese People expresses its desire to co-operate with all other
 peoples of the world in peace, justice, freedom and equality.
 TITLE I - THE STATE AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. The Congo, a sovereign state, is a Republic.
 The Republic of the Congo is indivisible, secular, democratic and social.
 1 La Conetitution de la Ripublique du Congo-Brazzaville, Mars 1964. Published
 by the Ministry of the Interior. Supplied by Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Translated
 by the Editor.
 
 85
 
 
 It shall ensure the equality of all citizens before the law, without
 distinction of origin, race or religion. It shall respect all beliefs.
 It shall guarantee to women rights equal to those of men.
 The motto of the Republic is "Unity, Work, Progress."
 Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the
 people.
 The national emblem is the tricolor flag, green, yellow and red. The
 flag of the Congo Republic shall be rectangular composed of two triangles,
 one green and one red, separated by a diagonal yellow band, the green
 triangle being on the side of the staff.
 The national anthem is "La Congolaise."
 The seal of State and the arms of the Republic shall be defined by law.
 Art. 2. Sovereignty belongs to the people who shall exercise it:
 - through their deputies to the National Assembly;
 - by means of referendum.
 No section of the people, nor any individual, may usurp this right.
 Art. 3. All Congolese citizens of both sexes who have reached their
 majority and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the
 conditions to be determined by law.
 Art. 4. Any act of racialothnic or religious discrimination, as well as
 any regionalist propaganda which might threaten the internal security
 of the State, the national unity or the integrity of the territory shall be
 punished by law.
 TITLE II - PUBLIC LIBERTIES AND LIBERTIES
 OF THE HUMAN PERSON
 Art. 5. The human person is sacred. The State is obliged to respect and
 protect it.
 Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality
 subject to respect for the rights of others and the public order.
 The freedom of the human person is inviolable.
 Noone may be arrested or detained except by order of a legitimate
 authority.
 Noone may be accused, arrested or detained except in the cases deter-
 mined by a law promulgated prior to the infraction involved.
 Art. 6. The domicile is inviolable. No search may be instituted except
 in the forms and conditions provided by law.
 Art. 7. The secrecy of correspondence shall be guaranteed by law.
 Art. 8. The right of property shall be incontestable. Noone may be
 deprived of his right of property except for reasons of public use and after
 the payment of damages or compensation under the conditions provided
 by law.
 Art. 9. Noone may be incommodated because of his opinions so long
 as their manifestation does not disturb the public order established as
 law.
 Free communication of thought and opinion shall be exercised by word
 and the press subject to respect for the laws and regulations.
 
 86
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 Art. 10. Freedom of association is guaranteed to all under the con-
 ditions established by law.
 Meetings or groups whose purpose or activity would be illegal or con-
 trary to public order shall be prohibited.
 Art. 11. Marriage and the family are the natural basis of society. They
 shall be under the protection of the law.
 Art. 12. The State shall guarantee equal access for children and adults
 to instruction, professional education and culture.
 Every child has the right to instruction and education.
 The State and the government units shall create the prior conditions
 and public institutions to provide for the education of children. Such
 education shall be provided by public and private schools. Private schools
 may be opened with the authorization and under the control of the State.
 Art. 13. Freedom of conscience and religion is guaranteed subject to
 respect for public order. Religious institutions and communities shall
 have the right to develop without hindrance subject to respect for the
 laws and regulations.
 Art. 14. Everyone has the right to work and to obtain employment.
 Noone may be injured in his work by reason of his origins, beliefs or
 opinions.
 Any man may defend his rights and interests by trade union activity
 and may belong to the trade union of his choice.
 Trade union liberties shall be exercised within the framework of the laws
 governing them.
 Every worker shall participate through his trade union delegates in the
 collective determination of the conditions of work.
 A law shall determine the conditions of assistance and protection ac-
 corded by society to workers.
 Art. 15. The defense of the country and of the integrity of the territory
 of the Republic is the duty of every citizen.
 Art. 16. All citizens of the Republic of the Congo have the duty to
 abide by the Constitution and laws of the Republic, to discharge their
 fiscal contributions and to fulfil honestly their social obligations.
 TITLE III - PARLIAMENT
 Art. 17. Parliament shall be composed of the National Assembly,
 whose members shall be elected by universal direct and secret suffrage
 for a term of five years and who shall bear the title of deputy.
 Art. 18. The method of election of the members of the National As-
 sembly, the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices
 incompatible with membership, as well as the number of deputies, shall
 be determined by law.
 Art. 19. The National Assembly shall automatically meet in two ordi-
 nary sessions on the second Tuesday of May and the first Tuesday of
 November, or the second following day if Tuesday is a holiday. The dura-
 tion of each session may not exceed forty five days.
 The Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session upon convocation
 of the Government or at the request of two thirds of its members.
 
 87
 
 
 The duration of each extraordinary session may not exceed fifteen
 days. The agenda shall be established by decree.
 The Assembly shall, moreover, meet in special session to administer
 the oath to the President of the Republic after proclamation of the results
 of the latter's election. It shall be convened at the request of the Head of
 State.
 Art. 20. The Secretariat of the National Assembly shall be elected
 and renewed each year at the beginning of the first session. At the start
 of a new legislature, however, the election of the Secretariat shall take place
 at the special session for the taking of the oath of the President of the
 Republic. The Secretariat then elected shall remain in office until the
 first ordinary session of the following year.
 Art. 21. No member of the National Assembly may be prosecuted,
 investigated, arrested, detained or tried because of his opinions or votes
 during the exercise of his functions.
 No member of the National Assembly may, during sessions, be prose-
 cuted for criminal or minor offenses without the authorization of the
 Assembly except in flagrante delicto.
 When the Assembly is not in session, no member may be arrested with-
 out the authorization of the Secretariat of the Assembly except in flagrante
 delicto, in cases of authorized prosecution or of final conviction.
 The detention or prosecution of a member of the Assembly shall be
 suspended if the Assembly so demands.
 Art. 22. The office of deputy shall be unpaid. Members of the National
 Assembly shall receive, during sessions, in addition to reimbursement
 of the cost of transportation from their residence to the seat of the As-
 sembly and vice versa and to the exclusion of any other payment, a
 per diem and reimbursement of expenses corresponding to the equivalent
 payment granted to Category 1 officials travelling abroad. This allowance
 shall be increased by one third in case of real loss of salary or revenue.
 TITLE IV - THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
 Art. 23. The President of the Republic shall be Head of State; he shall
 embody the national unity. He shall uphold respect for the Constitution and
 international treaties and agreements.
 He shall ensure, by his arbitration the regular functioning of the
 governmental authorities and the continuity of the State.
 Art. 24. The President of the Republic shall be elected for five years
 by an electoral college composed of the members of the National Assembly,
 the prefectoral, sub-prefectoral and the municipal councils.
 The election of the President of the Republic shall be by absolute
 majority on the first ballot. If this is not obtained, the President of the
 Republic shall be elected by relative majority on the second ballot.
 Voting shall be secret. It shall begin upon convocation of the Govern-
 ment.
 The election of a new President shall take place twenty days at least
 and fifty days at most before the expiration of the term of the incumbent
 President.
 
 88
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 The President of the Republic shall be eligible for re-election once.
 A law shall determine the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility,
 the presentation of candidacies, the conduct of elections, the counting
 of ballots and the proclamation of the results.
 The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of these operations.
 Art. 25. In the event that the Presidency of the Republic is vacant
 for whatever reason, and the Supreme Court so attests by a declaration,
 the functions of President of the Republic shall be exercised by the
 President of the National Assembly. The latter may not, however,
 exercise the powers provided in Articles 32 and 33, nor may Articles 51
 and 81 be applied during such a period.
 A new President of the Republic shall be elected twenty days at least
 and fifty days at most after the start of such a vacancy.
 Art. 26. Before taking office, the President of the Republic shall take
 the oath before the National Assembly, specially convened for this
 purpose. The terms of the oath shall be as follows:
 "I solemnly swear loyally to fulfil the high office which is entrusted to me,
 loyally to respect the rules and principles laid down in the Constitution,
 to be guided only by the general interest, and to consecrate all my efforts
 to seeking and protecting the public good."
 Art. 27. The President of the Republic shall appoint the Prime Minister
 and terminate his functions. He shall appoint the other members of the
 Government, determine their powers and terminate their functions.
 Art. 28. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council
 of Ministers. He shall be the Head of the Armed Forces. He shall have
 the right of pardon. He shall make appointments to high civil and military
 office. An organic law shall determine the posts nomination to which
 shall take place in the Council of Ministers as well as the conditions under
 which the President's power of appointment may be delegated by him
 to be exercised in his name.
 Art. 29. The President of the Republic, in the Council of Ministers, shall:
 - determine the policy of the Nation;
 - draw up bills;
 - exercise the regulatory power;
 - issue the ordinances provided in Article 58;
 - proclaim martial law and siege law when circumstances so require,
 under the conditions provided in Article 56 and in the particular laws
 applicable thereto.
 Art. 30. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws within
 fifteen days following the transmission to the Government of the finally
 adopted law. He may, before the expiration of this time limit, ask the
 National Assembly for a second reading. This shall not be refused. The
 provisions submitted to a second reading shall have the force of law fol-
 lowing their adoption by two thirds of the Members of the Assembly.
 The President shall apply to the Supreme Court concerning the un-
 constitutionality of laws within the time limit fixed for their promulgation.
 Art. 31. Subject to the provisions of Article 68, the President of the
 Republic shall preside over the High Council of the Judiciary.
 
 89
 
 
 Art. 32.JIf, within a single period of eighteen months, two ministerial
 crises occur under the conditions laid down in Articles 51 and 52, the
 President of the Republic may, after consultation with the Prime Minister
 and the President of the Assembly, pronounce the dissolution of the
 National Assembly. Dissolution shall be pronounced by decree. The
 National Assembly may not be dissolved, however, during the exercise
 of the powers provided in Article 37.
 Art. 33. The President of the Republic may submit to referendum
 any text which seems to him to require consultation with the people.
 A proposal adopted by referendum shall be promulgated within the time
 limit stipulated in Article 30.
 Art. 34. The President of the Republic shall issue the ordinances
 provided in Article 58, and shall sign decrees deliberated in the Council
 of Ministers.
 Art. 35. The President of the Republic shall accredit Ambassadors
 and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign powers; foreign Ambassadors and
 Envoys Extraordinary shall be accredited to him.
 Art. 36. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the
 National Assembly by messages read by the Prime Minister. Such messages
 shall not be followed by any debate.
 Art. 37. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence of
 the Nation, the integrity of its territory or the execution of its inter-
 national undertakings are threatened by a clear and present danger, the
 President of the Republic shall take the exceptional measures which
 the circumstances require, after official consultation with the Prime
 Minister, the President of the National Assembly and the President of
 the Supreme Court. He shall inform the Nation by a message, The
 National Assembly shall meet automatically. It may put an end to the
 exercise of the exceptional powers by a two-thirds majority vote of its
 members.
 Art. 38. The acts of the President of the Republic, other than those
 provided in Articles 27, paragraph 1, 30, paragraph 2, 32, 33, 36 and 37,
 shall be countersigned by the Prime7Minister and by the Ministers entrust-
 ed with their execution.
 TITLE V - THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 39. The Government shall conduct the policy of the Nation. It
 shall be responsible to the National Assembly under the conditions pro-
 vided in Articles 51 and 52.
 Art. 40. The Prime Minister shall direct the action of the Government.
 He shall ensure the executio nof the laws. He shall, by delegation of the
 President of the Republic, make appointments to civil and military
 office.
 Art. 41. The acts of the Prime Minister shall be countersigned by the
 Ministers charged with their execution.
 Art. 42. The functions of member of the Government shall be in-
 compatible with the exercise of any parliamentary mandate, with any
 civil employment and with any remunerated private activity.
 
 90
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 
 Art. 43. The Prime Minister and members of the Government shall
 have access to meetings of the National Assembly and of its commissions.
 They shall be heard when they so request. They may be assisted or
 represented at the National Assembly or in commission by officials
 appointed for this purpose.
 TITLE VI - RELATIONS BETWEEN
 PARLIAMENT AND THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 44. The Assembly alone shall pass the laws, agree taxation and
 vote the budget of the State.
 Art. 45. The President of the Republic and the members of the As-
 sembly together shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 Art. 46. The Assembly shall draw up its own agenda except in case
 of an extraordinary session.
 The agenda of the National Assembly shall give priority to the dis-
 cussion of Government bills deposited by the President of the Republic
 and Parliamentary bills accepted by him, in the order fixed by the
 Government.
 The discussion of bills shall pertain to the text presented by the Govern-
 ment.
 Deputies shall have the right of amendment.
 Art. 47. Deputies shall have the right to iniate expenditure, but no
 proposal tending to increase expenditure may be presented unless it is
 accompanied by a proposal concerning corresponding receipts or eco-
 nomes.
 Art. 48. The National Assembly shall pass the finance bill under the
 conditions to be provided by an organic law.
 The finance bill shall be filed with the National Assembly at the
 beginning of the November session.
 The finance bill must provide the receipts necessary wholly to cover
 expenditure.
 If the National Assembly has not acted before the end of the session,
 the bill as elaborated or modified by the amendments which the Govern-
 ment has accepted, shall be put into force by ordinance.
 Art. 49. The Assembly shall settle the Nation's accounts.
 Art. 50. The Assembly's methods of information regarding Government
 decisions shall be:
 - the oral question,
 - the written question,
 - hearings in Commission,
 - Commissions of Inquiry,
 - interpellation.
 Art. 51. Interpellation may be followed by the deposit of a motion of
 censure.
 Such a motion shall be accepted only if it has been signed by at least
 one tenth of the members of the National Assembly. A vote thereon may
 not take place until forty-eight hours after its deposition.
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 91
 
 
 Only votes favorable to the motion of censure shall be counted and a
 majority of two thirds of the members of the Assembly shall be required
 for adoption.
 Art. 52. When the National Assembly adopts a motion of censure,
 the Prime Minister must offer the President of the Republic the resign-
 ation of the Government.
 The incumbent Government at the time of the vote of the motion of
 censure shall be entrusted with the expedition of current business.
 TITLE VII - RESPECTIVE DOMAINS OF THE
 LAW AND REGULATIONS
 Art. 53. Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - citizenship, civil rights and the fundamental guarantees granted to
 the citizens for the exercise of their public liberties; the obligations
 imposed by the national defense upon the persons and property of
 citizens;
 - nationality, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts,
 inheritance and gifts;
 - procedures by which customs shall be ascertained and harmonized
 with the fundamental principles of the Constitution;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefor, criminal procedure; amnesty, the creation of new
 juridical systems and the status of magistrates;
 - the basis, the rate and the methods of collecting taxes of all kinds;
 - the electoral system for the National Assembly and the local assemblies;
 - the establishment of categories of public institutions;
 - the general statute for the civil service;
 - martial law and siege law.
 Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of:
 - the general organization of national defense;
 - education;
 - the system of property, property rights, civil and commercial obli-
 gations;
 - legislation pertaining to employment, unions and social security;
 - the sale and administration of State property;
 - investment and savings;
 - the system of transport and telecommunications.
 Art. 54. The financial laws shall determine the financial resources and
 obligations of the State.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives
 of the economic and social action of the State and the organization of
 production.
 Art. 55. The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war.
 Art. 56. A state of martial law shall be decreed in the Council of
 Ministers. The National Assembly shall meet automatically if it is not
 already in session.
 Its prorogation beyond fifteen days may be authorized only by the
 National Assembly.
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 92
 
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 Art. 57. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters passed before the entry
 into force of this Constitution may be modified by decree.
 Art. 58. The Government may, in order to carry out its program, ask the
 National Assembly to authorize it, for a limited period, to take by
 means of ordinances measures that normally fall within the domain of law.
 The ordinances shall be enacted in the Council of Ministers after consul-
 tation with the Supreme Court. They shall come into force upon their
 publication, but shall become null and void if the bill for their ratification
 is not submitted to the National Assembly before the date set by the
 enabling act.
 At the expiration of the time limit referred to in the first paragraph
 of the present article, the ordinances may be modified only by law in
 those matters which are within the legislative domain.
 Art. 59. Bills and amendments which are not within the domain of law
 shall be inadmissible. The President of the National Assembly shall
 declare their inadmissibility.
 In case of disagreement, the Supreme Court upon the request of the
 President of the Republic or the President of the National Assembly,
 shall rule within a time limit of eight days.
 TITLE VIII - INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
 Art. 60. The Republic of the Congo shall conform to the rules of
 international law.
 Art. 61. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify
 treaties, with the following exceptions: treaties relating to international
 organization, peace treaties, those that modify the internal organization
 of the State, and those that affect the domain of law as defined in Articles
 53 and following, may be ratified only by a law. They shall not take effect
 until they have been ratified.
 Art. 62. Treaties and agreements, duly ratified, shall, upon their
 publication, have an authority superior to that of laws, subject to their
 application by the other party.
 Art. 63. No cession, exchange or addition of territory shall be valid
 without the consent of the populations concerned.
 TITLE IX - THE JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 64. Justice shall be rendered over the territory of the Republic
 in the name of the Congolese people.
 Art. 65. Judges shall be subject only to the authority of the law in the
 exercise of their duties.
 Art. 66. The High Council of the Judiciary shall be composed of
 members ex officio and members appointed by the Council of Ministers.
 Ex officio members of the High Council shall be:
 - The President of the Republic as President;
 
 93
 
 
 - The Minister of Justice, Vice-President;
 The President of the Supreme Court;
 - The President of the Court of Appeal of Brazzaville.
 The Council of Ministers shall appoint as members:
 - A judge of the Court of Appeal;
 - A judge of the higher courts (Grande Instance)
 - A judge of the lower courts.
 - Three alternates shall be appointed in the same conditions.
 Decisions of the High Council of the Judiciary shall be by majority vote.
 In case of a tie, the President shall have the casting vote.
 Art. 67. Judges, with the exception of prosecuting magistrates, shall
 be appointed by the President of the Republic upon proposals of the
 High Council of the Judiciary.
 Matters shall be referred to the High Council of the Judiciary by the
 Minister of Justice.
 The High Council of the Judiciary shall, in accordance with the law,
 ensure the discipline of such judges, their independence and the ad-
 ministration of the courts.
 Judges shall have permanent tenure.
 Art. 68. When the High Council of the Judiciary sits as a disciplinary
 jurisdiction, the President of the Supreme Court shall preside.
 Art. 69. An organic law shall determine the status of the judiciary.
 Art. 70. Noone may be arbitrarily arrested nor detained. The judicial
 authority, guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure respect for this
 principle under the conditions stipulated by law.
 TITLE X - THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 71. The Supreme Court shall be the highest court of the Republic.
 It shall comprise:
 - a Judiciary Chamber;
 - an Administrative Chamber;
 - a Chamber of Accounts.
 A law shall determine the composition, organization, powers and
 functioning of the Supreme Court. It shall stipulate the conditions
 whereby persons known for their administrative or financial abilities
 may be appointed thereto.
 Art. 72. The Supreme Court, sitting as a Constitutional Council with
 all the Chambers together, shall pronounce on the constitutionality of
 laws and of international undertakings, as well as on conflicts of authority
 between the Government and the Parliament. It shall be judge as to
 whether the administrative authorities have exceeded their powers. It
 shall ensure that judicial decisions are in due form. It shall supervise
 the regularity of elections, the accounts of the Nation and the adminis-
 tration of public funds.
 Art. 73. The Supreme Court shall issue opinions and hand down
 decisions.
 Decisions of the Supreme Court may not be appealed to any authority
 
 94
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 whatsoever. They shall be binding on the Government, the Parliament
 and the judicial authorities.
 A provision which has been declared unconstitutional may neither be
 promulgated nor put into force.
 TITLE XI - THE ECONOMIC AND
 SOCIAL COUNCIL
 Art. 74. The Economic and Social Council may be consulted by the
 Government or by the National Assembly on any problem of an economic
 or social character of interest to the Republic.
 It shall give its opinion on bills, ordinances or decrees submitted to it.
 An organic law shall determine the composition, organization and
 functioning of the Economic and Social Council.
 The office of member of the Economic and Social Council shall be
 honorary.
 TITLE XII - THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 75. A High Court of Justice shall be instituted.
 It shall be composed of deputies elected by the National Assembly
 from among its members at the opening of each legislature.
 It shall elect its President from among its members.
 Art. 76. The High Court shall be competent to try members of the
 Government for actions performed in the exercise of their office and
 deemed to be crimes or misdemeanors, as well as to try their accomplices
 in case of a conspiracy against the security of the State.
 Art. 77. The President of the Republic shall not be held accountable
 for actions performed in the exercise of his office nor summoned before
 the High Court, except in case of high treason.
 Art. 78. The High Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and
 misdemeanors as well as by the determination of penalties as they are
 established by the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed.
 Art. 79. The President and the members of the Government may be
 indicted only by vote in open balloting and by a majority of two thirds
 of the deputies of the National Assembly.
 Art. 80. A law shall determine the conditions of operation of the High
 Court of Justice, the procedure to be followed before it and the number
 of its members.
 TITLE XIII - AMENDMENT OF THE
 CONSTITUTION
 Art. 81. The President of the Republic and the members of the National
 Assembly alike shall have the right to initiate amendment of the Consti-
 tution.
 Art. 82. In order to be taken under consideration, amendment bills
 
 95
 
 
 must be passed by a majority of two thirds of the members of the National
 Assembly.
 Amendments shall be submitted to approval by the people by refer-
 endum.
 Art. 83. The republican form of Government may not be the subject
 of amendment.
 TITLE XIV - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 84. At the first election for President of the Republic following the
 adoption of this Constitution, as an exception and in derogation of the
 provisions of Article 24, the Electoral College shall comprise only the
 members of the National Assembly and of the prefectural and sub-
 prefectural councils.
 The National Assembly shall meet automatically for this purpose on
 the second Thursday following its election, under the chairmanship of the
 oldest member.
 The election shall take place by secret ballot and an absolute majority
 on the first round. If this is not obtained, the President of the Republic
 shall be elected on the second round by relative majority.
 Art. 85. During the period of consolidation of the Revolution, a
 National Revolutionary Council shall be instituted.
 The National Revolutionary Council shall accomplish the fundamental
 objectives of the Revolution; it shall draw up the general policy of the
 Nation and inspire the action of the State on the basis of the profound
 aspirations of the masses.
 The National Revolutionary Council shall be presided over by the
 President of the Republic. Members of the Government shall be members
 automatically.
 An organic law shall establish the means of application of this article.
 Art. 86. The Provisional Government shall remain in office until the
 official proclamation of the results of the presidential election. It shall
 continue to ensure the expedition of current business until the formation
 of the new Government.
 The legislative measures necessary for the establishment of the insti-
 tutions pending the election of the members of the National Assembly shall
 be taken in the Council of Ministers upon the advice of the Supreme
 Court by means of ordinances having the force of law.
 For the same period and under the same conditions, the Government
 shall be authorized to take such measures as it deems necessary to the
 life of the Nation, the protection of its citizens and the safeguarding of
 their liberties.
 Art. 87. The powers provided in Article 86, paragraphs 2 and 3, above,
 shall be granted to the first Government resulting from the presidential
 elections in the same conditions and for the same purposes until the first
 meeting in ordinary session of the National Assembly.
 Art. 88. The laws, ordinances and regulations presently in force shall
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)
 
 96
 
 
 Congo (Brazzaville)                      97
 remain applicable insofar as they are not contrary to this Constitution
 so long as they have not been modified or abrogated.
 The ordinances and measures taken by the Provisional Government
 of the Republic of the Congo from August 15, 1963 shall be validated
 by this Constitution, in particular those relating to the organization or
 the Constitutional Referendum, the election of the President of the
 Republic and of the deputies to the National Assembly.
 Art. 89. This Constitution shall be executed as the supreme law of the
 State.
 
 
</pre>
