<pre>
 Burundi
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 KINGDOM of BURUNDI'
 July 1, 1962
 MWAMBUTSA IV
 King of the Burundi
 To all present and to come greetings:
 Affirming our belief in God and our conviction of the eminent dignity
 of the human person;
 Having decided to guarantee the fundamental rights of man;
 Seeking to promote the unity of the Murundi people as well as the
 economic, social and cultural progress of each of the inhabitants of
 Burundi under a truly democratic regime;
 Basing ourselves upon the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man
 and the Charter of the United Nations;
 The National Assembly has adopted and we have ratified the following:
 TITLE I
 THE TERRITORY AND ITS DIVISIONS
 Art. 1. Burundi is a Kingdom divided into eight provinces as follows:
 Bubanza, Bujumbura, Bururi, Gitega, Muramvya, Muyinga, Ngozi,
 Ruyigi.
 The Kingdom may, if necessary, be divided by law into a greater number
 of provinces.
 Art. 2. The provinces may be subdivided only by law.
 Art. 3. The boundaries of the Kingdom, of the provinces, of the districts
 and of the communities may be changed or rectified only by law.
 
 1 Bulletin Officiel du Burundi, 1 janvier 1963. Supplied by the Ministry of Foreign
 Affairs. Translated by the Editor.
 
 19
 
 
 Burundi
 
 TITLE II
 BARUNDI AND THEIR RIGHTS
 Art. 4. The status of Murundi shall be acquired, retained and lost in
 accordance with rules established by law.
 Art. 5. Naturalization shall be granted by the legislative authority.
 Naturalization shall equate the foreigner with the Murundi.
 Art. 6. There shall be no racial distinction in the State. Barundi shall be
 equal before the law and only Barundi shall be eligible for civil and military
 posts, except for particular cases which may be established by law.
 Art. 7. Individual liberties shall be guaranteed. No one may be prose-
 cuted or arrested except in the cases and manner provided by law.
 Art. 8. No one may be transferred against his will from the jurisdiction
 assigned to him by law.
 Art. 9. No penalty may be instituted or applied except by law.
 Art. 10. The domicile shall be inviolable. Search may not take place
 except in the circumstances and form provided by law.
 Art. 11. Individual landed property shall be guaranteed. Special laws
 shall establish the procedures applicable thereto.
 Art. 12. No one may be deprived of his property except for reasons
 of public utility in the circumstances and manner instituted by law and
 after just and prior indemnity.
 Art. 13. The freedom of religion, of its public exercise and of the ex-
 pression of religious opinions shall be guaranteed. The penalties for crimes
 committed in connection with the exercise of this freedom shall be
 determined by law.
 Art. 14. The State shall have no right to intervene in the appointment
 or in the installation of the ministers of any religion, nor to forbid them
 to correspond with their superiors or publish their acts except, in the
 latter case, under the safeguards normal in matters of press and publi-
 cation.
 Art. 15. Both civil and religious marriage shall be recognized by the
 Constitution. Polygamy shall be abolished; special laws shall regulate the
 procedure applicable thereto.
 Art. 16. Education shall be free. Punishment for misdemeanors shall
 be regulated only by law.
 Art. 17. The press shall be free except for the restrictions instituted
 by law. Laws shall punish severely any attempt against the security
 of the State.
 Art. 18. All Barundi have the right of association and of assembly,
 except in regard to associations or assemblies which are illegal or contrary
 to morals.
 
 20
 
 
 Art. 19. Everyone shall have the right to address petitions to the
 governmental authorities signed by one or more persons. Only existing
 bodies shall have the right to address petitions collectively.
 Art. 20. The secrecy of correspondence shall be inviolable. Nevertheless,
 a law shall institute agents authorized to open suspect letters in the mails.
 Art. 21. The official languages of Burundi are Kirundi and French.
 Art. 22. No prior authorization shall be required to undertake prose-
 cutions against public officials in respect of matters within their adminis-
 tration, except insofar as special procedures are stipulated in respect of
 Ministers.
 TITLE III
 THE POWERS
 Art. 23. All powers emanate from the nation. They shall be exercised
 in the manner established by the Constitution.
 Art. 24. The legislative power shall be exercised collectively by the
 King, the National Assembly and the Senate.
 Art. 25. Each of these three branches shall have the right to initiate
 legislation.
 Art. 26. The legislative power alone is empowered to interpret authori-
 tatively the laws.
 Art. 27. The executive power shall belong to the King in the manner
 provided by the Constitution.
 Art. 28. The judicial power shall be exercised by the courts and tribunals.
 Decrees and judgments shall be executed in the name of the King.
 Art. 29. Exclusively communal interests shall be regulated by the
 communal councils in accordance with the principles established by the
 Constitution.
 CHAPTER I. THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE SENATE
 Section I. Common Provisions
 Art. 30. The members of the National Assembly and of the Senate,
 elected according to law, shall represent the nation.
 Art. 31. Meetings of the two chambers shall be public, unless, at the
 request of their respective presidents or of five members, they take place
 in secret committee. The respective chambers shall then decide by
 absolute majority if the meeting shall resume in public on the same subject.
 Art. 32. Each chamber shall verify the credentials of its members and
 
 Burunli
 
 21
 
 
 shall be the final judge in any questions that may arise in this connection.
 No one may be a member of both chambers at the same time.
 Art. 33. Any member of either chamber who is appointed to any
 salaried office other than that of Minister or Official Secretary shall,
 upon accepting such appointment, immediately lose his seat, and may
 resume it only after a new election.
 Art. 34. The rules of procedure shall establish the procedure for the
 election of the President and Vice-Presidents and of the Secretariat.
 They shall fix the term of office and the manner of terminating office.
 Art. 35. All resolutions shall be passed by an absolute majority of the
 votes except where the rules and procedures provide otherwise. In case
 of a tie, the proposal under consideration shall be rejected. Neither of the
 chambers may pass resolutions unless the majority of its members is
 present.
 Art. 36. Votes shall be passed by raised hands, by roll call, or by secret
 ballot.
 Art. 37. Each chamber shall have the right of instituting inquiries.
 Art. 38. No bill may be adopted until it has been considered article
 by article and then voted as a whole.
 Art. 39. The chambers have the right to amend and to subdivide
 proposed articles and amendments.
 Art. 40. It is forbidden to present petitions in person to the chambers.
 Each chamber shall have the right to return to the Ministers any petitions
 addressed to it. Ministers shall be required to provide explanations of
 their content whenever the National Assembly or the Senate so require.
 Art. 41. No member of the National Assembly or of the Senate may be
 prosecuted or arrested for his opinions and votes during the exercise of
 his functions.
 Art. 42. No member of the National Assembly or of the Senate may,
 during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for crimes or misdemeanors
 without the authorization of the chamber to which he belongs, except
 in flagrante delicto. The detention or prosecution of a member of one of the
 chambers shall be suspended during the session and for the whole duration
 of the session if the chamber to which he belongs so requests.
 Art. 43. Each chamber shall determine in its rules of procedure the
 manner in which it shall exercise its power.
 Art. 44. Deputies shall be elected directly by Barundi citizens of both
 sexes who fulfil the electoral conditions established by law. Each voter
 shall have the right to only one vote.
 Art. 45. The constitution of the electoral rolls shall be determined by
 law for the whole kingdom. Elections shall take place according to the
 system instituted by law. The vote shall be secret and obligatory. Voting
 shall take place at the commune except as otherwise provided by law.
 Art. 46. An electoral law shall establish the number of deputies and
 
 22
 
 Burundi
 
 
 senators in accordance with the population. It shall regulate also the
 conditions required to be registered as a voter and the conduct of elections.
 Art. 47. Members of Parliament' shall be elected for six years. Parliament
 shall be renewed every six years.
 Art. 48. A law shall institute the emoluments which shall be granted
 to Deputies and Senators.
 Section II. The National Assembly
 Art. 49. In order to be eligible for the National Assembly it is necessary:
 (a) to be Murundi by birth or naturalization;
 (b) to enjoy political and civil rights;
 (c) to be at least 25 years of age;
 (d) to be resident in Burundi.
 Section III. The Senate
 Art. 50. The Senate may be established upon the initiative of the legis-
 lative power; the conditions of eligibility, the method of election and
 its organization shall be determined by law.
 CHAPTER II. THE KING AND HIS MINISTERS
 Section I. The King
 Art. 51. The King is a constitutional monarch. The constitutional
 powers of the King shall be in principle hereditary to the direct natural
 and legitimate descendente of H.M. MWAMBUTSA IV, from male to male
 to the exclusion of females and their descendants. Within this line, the
 King shall appoint his successor by a notarized Act. For lack of such ap-
 pointment, the chamber or chambers, meeting in National Assembly,
 and with the presence of the Counsellors of the Crown, shall appoint a
 successor. Failing a legitimate successor, the King may nevertheless
 appoint a successor outside of this line by means of a solemn declaration
 before Parliament and the Council of the Crown meeting in Assembly.
 This appointment must be drawn up in an official report by the President
 of the Assembly and countersigned by three members appointed for this
 purpose by the Assembly. The successor so appointed shall be immediately
 recognized by the Parliament and the Council of the Crown meeting in
 assembly and voting by majority.
 In case there is neither a legitimate successor nor an appointed successor
 1 Parliament means the National Assembly and the Senate together.
 
 Burundi
 
 23
 
 
 invested by Parliament, the throne shall be vacant and Parliament,
 together with the Counsellors of the Crown, shall appoint the successor.
 This appointment shall be made according to the procedures stipulated
 for amending the Constitution.
 Art. 52. The dynasty of the kingdom of Burundi recognizes the cycle
 of the following four names:
 (1) Mwambutsa son of Mutaga
 (2) Ntare son of Mwambutsa
 (3) Mwezi son of Ntare
 (4) Mutage son of Mwezi.
 Art. 53. The Constitution of the kingdom of Burundi recognizes for the
 King and the Crown Prince only marriages contracted with a Murundikazi
 by birth.
 Art. 54. The King is the Head of the State. The King may not be the
 head of any other State without the consent of the chambers.
 Art. 55. The person of the King shall be inviolable. His Ministers shall
 be responsible.
 Art. 56. No act of the King may take effect unless it has been counter-
 signed by a Minister who becomes thereby responsible.
 Art. 57. The King shall appoint and dismiss his Ministers.
 Art. 58. He shall confer the ranks in the armed forces. He shall make
 appointments within the general administration and within the adminis-
 tration of external affairs, except as provided by law. He shall make no
 other appointments except in accordance with a specific law.
 Art. 59. He shall issue the regulations and decrees necessary for the
 implementation of the laws, without ever having the power either to
 suspend the laws or to prevent their execution.
 Art. 60. The King shall command all the Armed Forces of the Kingdom,
 shall declare war, make treaties of peace, alliance and commerce, and
 shall inform the chambers thereof as soon as the interest and security
 of the State permit, together with any relevant information.
 Treaties of commerce and those which might injure the State or bind
 individual Barundi, shall not take effect until they have received the
 consent of the chambers.
 No cession, no exchange, no addition of territory may take place except
 by law. In no case may secret articles of a treaty negate the published
 articles.
 Art. 61. The King shall ratify and promulgate the laws after consul-
 tation with the Council of the Crown. Whenever he considers that a
 resolution adopted by one or both chambers is contrary to the Con-
 stitution or to the general interest, the King shall refrain from giving
 royal ratification.
 He may inform the chamber or chambers of such considerations as he
 deems useful and request them to examine the matter again.
 
 24
 
 Burundi
 
 
 Art. 62. The chambers shall convene by right twice a year, during the
 second week of the months of May and October for at least seven days
 unless they have previously been convened by the King. He shall adjourn
 the sessions. He has the right to convene the chambers in extraordinary
 session.
 Art. 63. The King has the right to dissolve the chambers, either together
 or separately. The act of dissolution shall also make provision for the
 convening of elections within forty days and of the chambers within two
 months.
 Art. 64. The King may adjourn the chambers. Adjournment may not
 exceed a period of one month, but it may be renewed.
 Art. 65. He shall have the right in the cases provided by law, to remit
 or reduce penalties imposed by judges.
 Art. 66. The King shall have the right to issue money in the imple-
 mentation of a law.
 Art. 67. He shall have the right to confer titles of nobility, without,
 however, being able to attach privileges to such titles.
 Art. 68. He shall confer military and civil decorations in accordance
 with the law.
 Art. 69. A law shall establish the civil list for the duration of each
 reign.
 Art. 70. The King shall have no powers other than those expressly
 conferred by the Constitution or by particular laws passed in accordance
 with the Constitution.
 Art. 71. Ten days at the latest after the death of the King, the chambers
 shall assemble without convocation. If the chambers have been previously
 dissolved and convocation has been set in the act of dissolution for a time
 later than the tenth day, the incumbent chambers shall resume their
 duties until the meeting of the chambers replacing them.
 From the death of the King until his successor or regent has taken the
 oath, the constitutional powers of the King shall be exercised in the name
 of Murundi people by the Ministers in Council and under their responsi-
 bility.
 Art. 72. The King shall reach his majority when he has completed
 sixteen years. He may not ascend the throne until he has taken the follow-
 ing oath before the chambers: "I swear, before the National Assembly
 and the Senate, to observe the Constitution and laws of the Murundi
 people; to maintain the national independence and the integrity of King-
 dom."
 Art. 73. If at the death of the King his successor is a minor, one or
 both chambers and the Council of the Crown, being empowered so to
 deliberate, shall meet in a single assembly to provide for the regency.
 Art. 74. If the King is unable to reign, the Ministers shall, having
 officially noted this inability, immediately convene one or both chambers.
 
 Burundi
 
 25
 
 
 The guardianship and regency shall be established by one or both cham-
 bers meeting together. The regency may be conferred only on one single
 person. The regent shall take office only after having taken the oath
 stipulated in Article 72.
 Art. 75. No change in the Constitution may take place during a regency.
 Art. 76. Whenever the throne falls vacant, the chambers shall provide
 for a provisional regency pending a meeting of the chambers reelected in
 toto. This meeting shall take place within two months at the latest.
 The new chamber or chambers shall institute the definitive regency.
 Art. 77. The King shall be assisted by a Council of the Crown which
 shall be appointed and dismissed by him. The Council shall be composed
 of six members, three appointed by the King and three proposed by the
 National Assembly. The powers of this Council shall be purely advisory
 except insofar as the Constitution provides otherwise.
 Section II. The Ministers
 Art. 78. Ministers must be Murundi by birth.
 Art. 79. Ministers may take part in the deliberations of the chambers
 only when they are members. They shall have access to one or both
 chambers and must be heard when they so request. The chambers may
 require the presence of Ministers.
 Art. 80. In no case, either by written or by oral order, may the King
 relieve a Minister of his responsibility.
 Art. 81. The Chamber of Representatives shall have the right to accuse
 Ministers and to bring them before the Supreme Court which alone shall
 be competent to try them, except insofar as the law provides for civil
 action by a damaged party and except in respect of crimes or misdemeanors
 committed by Ministers outside the exercise of their functions.
 Art. 82. The King may not pardon any Minister who has been con-
 demned.
 CHAPTER III. THE JUDICIAL POWER
 Art. 83. Litigation in respect of civil rights shall be exclusively within
 the jurisdiction of the courts.
 Art. 84. Litigation with respect to political rights shall be within the
 jurisdiction of the courts except insofar as the law provides otherwise.
 Art. 85. No court and no claims jurisdiction may be established except
 by law.
 Art. 86. Trials shall be public unless publicity would endanger order or
 morals, and in such case the court must formally so decide. In matters of
 
 26
 
 Burundi
 
 
 political crimes or misdemeanors involving freedom of the press the deci-
 sion to meet in closed session must be unanimous.
 Art. 87. All verdicts must be accompanied by the reasons therefore
 and shall be pronounced in public session.
 Art. 88. In all criminal matters subject to the penalty of death or
 life imprisonment, in political matters and in misdemeanors involving
 the freedom of the press, a jury shall be provided.
 Art. 89. Judges shall be appointed and dismissed by the King upon the
 proposal of the Minister of Justice.
 Art. 90. Judges shall be appointed for life, after a period of training
 which the law shall establish.
 Art. 91. The King shall appoint and dismiss, after proposals by the
 Minister of Justice, law officers attached to the courts and tribunals.
 Art. 92. Emoluments of the members of the judiciary shall be stipulated
 by law.
 Art. 93. No judge may accept salaried office from the Governor unless
 he exercises it gratuitously, and subject to the cases of incompatibility
 stipulated by law.
 Art. 94. Except as otherwise provided by law there shall be the follow-
 ing courts in Burundi: residence courts, provincial courts, inferior courts,
 a court of appeal, a Supreme Court. The Supreme Court may become, by
 law, the highest court of appeal.
 Art. 95. The Supreme Court shall consider infractions committed by
 Ministers, Deputies and Senators in the exercise of their office, shall
 settle constitutional conflicts between the powers and shall judge of the
 constitutionality of laws. A law may institute other special rules for
 trying infractions committed by magistrates, high officials and other
 persons holding public office.
 Art. 96. Special laws shall regulate the organization of military tri-
 bunals, their powers, the rights and obligations of members of such
 tribunals and the duration of their office.
 Art. 97. Courts and tribunals shall apply provincial and local decrees
 and general regulations only insofar as they conform to the laws.
 CHAPTER IV. PROVINCIAL AND COMMUNAL INSTITUTIONS
 Art. 98. Provincial and communal institutions shall be established and
 regulated by law.
 
 Burundi
 
 27
 
 
 Burundi
 
 TITLE IV
 FINANCES
 Art. 99. No tax or charge, and no levy by the State, the provinces or
 the communes may be instituted except by law. A law shall provide the
 exceptions shown by experience to be necessary in favor of the provinces
 and communes.
 Art. 100. State taxes shall be voted annually. The laws which set them
 shall remain in force only for one year unless they are renewed.
 Art. 101. No privileges in tax matters may be instituted. No exemptions
 or moderations of a tax may be instituted except by law.
 Art. 102. Except for cases which the law expressly provides, no payment
 may be required from citizens except as a tax to the State, the province
 or the commune.
 Art. 103. No pension or other benefit may be charged to the public
 treasury except by law.
 Art. 104. Each year the chambers shall draw up the accounts and vote
 the budget. All receipts and expenses of the State shall be carried in the
 budget and in the accounts. The Accounts Court and its powers shall be
 instituted by law.
 Art. 105. Members of the Accounts Court shall be appointed by the
 Chamber of Representatives for a term to be decided by law. This court
 shall be responsible for the examination and liquidation of the accounts
 of the general administration and of all other persons or administrations
 accountable to the public treasury. It shall see that no item of the budget
 has been exceeded and that no transfer has taken place. It shall draw
 up the accounts of the different administrations of the State and shall be
 responsible for collecting for this purpose all necessary information and
 documents. The general account shall be submitted to the Chamber to-
 gether with the observations of the Court of Accounts. This court shall
 be organized by a law.
 Art. 106. A law may regulate the pecuniary intervention of the State
 in the works of Ministers of Religion.
 TITLE V
 THE PUBLIC FORCES
 Art. 107. The method of recruitment of the Army shall be determined
 by law. A law shall also provide for promotion, the rights and the obli-
 gations of military personnel.
 Art. 108. The budget for the army shall be voted annually. The law
 which sets this shall remain in force only for one year unless it is renewed.
 
 28
 
 
 Art. 109. The organization and powers of the constabulary shall be
 established by law.
 Art. 110. No foreign troup may be permitted to serve the State, to
 occupy or cross the territory except by law.
 Art. 111. The organization of a civil guard shall be regulated by law
 should the occasion arise.
 Art. 112. Military personnel may not be deprived of their rank, honors
 and pensions except as provided by law.
 TITLE VI
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 113. The Murundi nation shall adopt as its colors, green, white and
 red and as the Kingdom's coat of arms the drum, sorghum, lances and
 the lion. The motto of the Kingdom of Murundi is: God, the King and the
 Burundi:
 Art. 114. The city of Bujumbura shall be the capital of the kingdom of
 Burundi.
 Art. 115. No oath may be imposed except by a law which shall also
 specify its wording.
 Art. 116. Any foreigner who is legally in the territory of Burundi shall
 enjoy the protection granted to persons and possessions, except as
 otherwise provided by law.
 Art. 117. No law, decree or regulation of the general, provincial or
 communal administration shall be binding until it has been published
 in the form prescribed by law.
 Art. 118. The Constitution may not be suspended either in whole or
 in part.
 TITLE VII
 AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
 Art. 119. The legislative power shall have the right to declare whether
 any constitutional provision requires amendment. After such declaration
 the two chambers shall automatically be dissolved. New chambers shall
 be convened in accordance with Article 63. One or both chambers to-
 gether with the Counselors of the Crown shall pronounce, in agreement
 with the King, on the matters submitted for amendment. Neither chamber
 may deliberate unless at least two thirds of its members are present, and
 no change may be, adopted that has not received at least two thirds of
 the votes.
 
 Burundi
 
 29
 
 
 Burudi
 
 TITLE VIII
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 120. Until enacted by law, Parliament and the Supreme Court
 shall have discretionary power respectively to accuse and to try a Minister
 for an offence and subject to a penalty determined by them.
 Art. 121. From the day this Constitution enters into force, all laws,
 decrees, regulations and other acts contrary thereto shall be abrogated.
 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
 Art. 122. The legislative power shall ensure that the following matters
 shall be the object of special laws:
 (1) the abolition of exceptional laws and the amendment of all other
 laws, decrees and ordinances issued by the regency;
 (2) the press;
 (3) organization of juries;
 (4) finances;
 (5) provincial and communal organizations;
 (6) the responsibility of Ministers and of other agents of the executive
 power.
 (7) measures appropriate to deal with abuses of pluralism and of
 financial trusts.
 (8) amendment of legislation relating to bankruptcy and reprieve;
 (9) organization of the army, rights of promotion, retirement, and the
 military penal code;
 (10) revision of the codes;
 (11) judicial organization.
 The legislative power entrusts the implementation of this article to the
 executive power.
 Art. 123. This Constitution shall enter into force on July 1, 1962.
 We promulgate this constitution and we order that it receive the royal
 seal and be published in the official gazette of Burundi. -
 Done at Usumbura October 16, 1962.
 
 30
 
 
</pre>
