<pre>
 A.F.R.C.D. 24.
 
 CONSTITUTION OF THE THIRD REPUBLIC OF GHANA
 (PROMULGATION) DECREE, 1979
 WHEREAS by the Constituent Assembly Decree, 1978 (S.M.C.D. 203) as subsequently amended a Constituent Assembly was established and section 2 of the said Decree prescribed the functions of the said Assembly as follows:-
2. The Constituent Assembly-
(a) shall have full power to deliberate upon the Constitution for the Establishment of a Transitional (Interim) National Government for Ghana drawn up by the Constitutional Commission;
 (b) may make such amendments in the
 said draft Constitution as may appear
 to it necessary in the national interest;
 (c) shall submit to the Supreme Military
 Council not later than the 16th day of
 April, 1979 a Constitution for the
 administration of Ghana;
 (d) shall submit by the date specified in para-
 graph (c) of this section or such later
 date as the Supreme Military Council
 may allow, a report of all changes made
 by the Constituent Assembly in the draft
 Constitution drawn up by the Constitu-
 tional Commission giving where possible
 reasons for the changes."
 AND WHEREAS the Constituent Assembly after completion of
 their functions under the said Decree submitted to the Supreme
 Military Council a Constitution for the administration of Ghana;
 AND WHEREAS on the 4th day of June, 1979 the Government
 of the Supreme Military Council was overthrown and the Aimed
 Forces Revolutionary Council was established as the Government
 of Ghana;
 AND WHEREAS the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
 considers it expedient to promulgate the Constitution submitted
 by the Constituent Assembly subject to such changes as it deems
 necessary in the public interest;
 Now, THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED by the Armed Forces Revolu-
 tionary Council as follows-
 1. (1) The Constitution set out in the Schedule to this Decree Enactment of
 shall be the Constitution by which Ghana shall be governed.  Constitution
 for Ghana.
 
 
 A.F.R.C.D. 24.
 
 CONSTITUTION OF THE THIRD REPUBLIC OF GHANA
 (PROMULGATION) DECREE, 1979
 (2) The said Constitution shall have the force of law.
 2. The Constitution shall come into force on the 24th day of September, 1979.
3. Whenever it becomes necessary for the Constitution to be
printed the Government Printer may omit all parts of this Decree
 and the Constitution as so printed shall, subject to the provisions
 of sections 1 and 2 of this Decree have the force of law notwith- standing the omission.
4. The Constituent Assembly is hereby dissolved and accordingly
the following enactments are hereby repealed-
 the Constituent Assembly Decree, 1978 (S.M.C.D. 203),
 the Constituent Assembly (Amendment) (No. 2) Decree,
 1978 (S.M.C.D. 207),
 the Constituent Assembly (Commencement of Proceed-
 ings) Proclamation, 1978 (S.M.C.D. 209), and
 the Constituent Assembly (Amendment) Decree, 1979
 (S.M.C.D. 220).
5. The provisions of this Decree shall replace all the provisions
of the Constitution of the third Republic of Ghana (Promulgation)
 S.      *Decree, 1979 (A.F.R.C.D. 8) and accordingly, the said Constitution
 of the Third Republic of Ghana (Promulgation) Decree, 1979
 (A.F.R.C.D. 8) shall cease to have effect.
 SCHEDULE
 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA, 1979
 
 2
 
 
 REPUBLIC OF GHANA
 
 CONSTITUTION
 OF THE
 REPUBLIC
 OF
 GHANA
 
 1979
 
 
 
 ARRANGEMENT OF CHAPTERS
 
 Ti PREAMBLE
 Chapter
 1. THE CONSTITUTION
 2. THE LAWS OF GHANA
 3. THE TERRITOIEBS OF GHANA
 4. DIRECTIV PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
 5. CITIZENSHIP
 6. FuNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS
 Liberty of the Individual
 Emergency Powers
 Protection of Rights by Courts
 7. REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
 8. THE EXEcuTIVE
 The President
 International Relations
 The Cabinet
 The National Security Council
 The National Development Commission
 The Attorney-General
 9. THE LEGISLATURE
 Composition of Parliament
 Procedure in Parliament
 Summoning, Dissolution
 Privileges and Immunities
 Contempt of Parliament
 The Parliamentary Service
 10. THE COUNCIL OF STATE
 
 
 Chapter
 11. THE OMBUDSMAN
 12. THE JUDICIARY
 The Superior Court of Judicature
 The Supreme Court
 The Court of Appeal
 The High Court of Justice
 Miscellaneous
 13. FINANCE
 General
 The Statistical Service
 The Auditor-General
 The Audit Service
 14. THE PUBLIC SERVICES
 15. THE PRISONS SERVICE
 16. THE ARMED FORCES OF GHANA
 17. THE POLICE SERVICE
 18. NATIONAL SERVICE
 19. CHIEFTAINCY
 20. LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
 21. LANDS
 
 22.
 23.
 24.
 25.
 26.
 
 Public Lands
 The Lands Commission
 Stool Lands
 THE PRESS COMMISSION
 CoMMIsSIONS OF INQUIRY
 CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PUBLIC OFFICERS
 AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
 MISCELLANEOUS
 
 ii
 
 
 SCHEDULES
 
 First Schedule
 Part I   - First President
 Part II - First Parliament
 Part III - The Judiciary
 Part IV - Miscellaneous
 Part V   - Public Corporations
 Second Schedule
 Oaths
 
 iii
 
 
 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC
 OF GHANA
 ARRANGEMENT OF ARTICLES
 CHAPTER ONE
 THE CONSTITUTION
 Article
 1. Supremacy of the Constitution
 2. Enforcement of the Constitution
 3. Defence of the Constitution
 CHAPTER Two
 THE LAWS OF GHANA
 4. The Laws of Ghana
 CHAPTER THREE
 THE TERRITORIES OF GHANA
 5. Territories of Ghana
 CHAPTER FouR
 DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF
 STATE POLICY
 6. Implementation of Provisions
 7. National Integration and Unity
 8. Objectives of Economic Policy
 9. Objectives of Social Policy
 10. Objectives of Educational Policy
 11. International Relations
 iv
 
 
 CHAPTER FIVE
 
 CITIZENSHIP
 Article
 12. Citizens of Ghana
 13. Persons born in or outside Ghana
 14. Foundlings, etc.
 15. Persons entitled to be registered as Citizens
 16. Dual Citizenship
 17. Citizenship Laws by Parliament
 18. Interpretation
 CHAPTER Six
 FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS
 Liberty of the Individual
 19. Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the Individual
 20. Protection of Right to Life
 21. Protection of Right to Personal Liberty
 22. Protection from Slavery and Forced Labour.
 23. Protection from Inhuman Treatment
 24. Protection from Deprivation of Property
 25. Protection for Privacy of Home and Other Property
 26. Provisions to Secure Protection of Law
 27. Protection of Freedom of Conscience
 28. Protection of Freedom of Expression
 29. Protection of Freedom of Assembly and Association
 30. Protection of Freedom of Movement
 31. Protection from Discrimination, etc.
 
 v
 
 
 Article
 
 32. Equal Rights of Mothers, Spouses and of Children
 Emergency Powers
 33. Provisions for Times of War and Public Emergency
 Protection of Rights by Courts
 34. Persons Detained under Emergency Laws
 35. Enforcement of Protective Provisions
 CHAPTER SEVEN
 REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
 36. The Right to Vote
 37. The Electoral Commission
 38. Supervision of Elections and Referenda
 39. Constituencies
 40. Voting at Elections and Referenda
 41. Election of Candidates
 42. The Organization of Political Parties
 43. Restrictions on Certain Propaganda
 CHAPTER EIGHT
 THE EXECUTIVE
 The President
 44. The President of Ghana
 45. The Executive Authority of Ghana
 46. Absence from Ghana
 vi
 
 
 Article
 47. The Vice-President and Succession to the Presidency
 48. Public and Presidential Seals
 49. Qualifications of President
 50. Election of President
 51. Challenging Election of President
 52. The Presidential Election Regulations
 53. Term of Office
 54. Presidential Messages
 55. Conditions of Office
 56. Removal of President
 57. Appointments by the President
 58. Determination of Certain Emoluments[
 59. Prerogative of Mercy
 60. Professional Organisations
 International Relations
 61. Diplomatic Representation
 62. Execution of Treaties
 The Cabinet
 63. The Cabinet
 64. Meetings of the Cabinet
 65. Ministers of State
 66. Deputy Ministers
 67. Oaths
 68. Tenure of Office of Ministers, etc.
 69. Vote of Censure
 
 vu
 
 
 Article
 The National Security Council
 70. The National Security Council
 71. Functions of the National Security Council
 72. Establishment of Security Services
 The National Development Commission
 73. National Development Commission
 The Attorney-General
 74. The Attorney-General
 CHAPTER NINE
 THE LEGISLATURE
 Composition of Parliament
 75. The Parliament of Ghana
 76. Qualifications and Disqualifications
 77. The Speaker
 78. Deputy Speakers
 79. Tenure of Office of Members
 80. Emoluments of Members
 81. Determination of Question as to Membership
 Procedure in Parliament
 82. Oath of Members
 83. Presiding in Parliament
 84. Quorum in Parliament
 85. Committees of Parliament
 86. Voting in Parliament
 
 viii
 
 
 Article
 87. Unqualified Person Sitting or Voting
 88. Mode of Exercising Legislative Power
 89. Retroactive Legislation
 90. Settlement of Financial Matters
 91. Standing Orders of Parliament
 92. Attendance by a Minister of State, etc.
 Summoning, Dissolution
 93. Sessions of Parliament
 94. Dissolution
 95. Gratuity for Members of Parliament
 Privileges and Immunities
 96. Freedom of Speech and Proceedings
 97. Immunity from Proceedings for Acts in Parliament
 98. Immunity from Service of Process and Arrest
 99. Immunity from Witness Summons
 100. Immunity from Service as Juryman
 101. Immunity for Publication of Proceedings
 102. Privileges of Witnesses
 Contempt of Parliament
 103. General Contempt
 104. Criminal Proceedings
 The Parliamentary Service
 105. The Parliamentary Service
 CHAPTER TEN
 THE COUNCIL OF STATE
 106. The Council of State
 107. Consideration of Bills by the Council of State
 
 ix
 
 
 Article
 108. Other Functions of the, Council of State
 109. Procedure in the Council of State
 CHAPTER ELEVEN
 THE OMBUDSMAN
 110. Establishment of Ombudsman
 111. Functions of Ombudsman
 112. Legislation relating to Ombudsman
 113. Qualifications of the Ombudsman
 CHAPTER TWELVE
 THE JUDICIARY
 -      The Superior Court of Judicature
 114. The Judicial Power of Ghana
 The Supreme Court
 115. Composition of the Supreme Court
 116. General Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 117. Appellate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 118. Original Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 119. Supervisory Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
 120. Powers of a Single Justice of the Supreme Court
 The Court of Appeal
 121. Composition of the Court of Appeal
 122. Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
 123. Powers of a Single Justice of the Court of Appeal
 The High Court of Justice
 124. Composition of the High Court of Justice
 
 x
 
 
 Article
 125. Jurisdiction of the High Court of Justice
 126. Supervisory Jurisdiction
 Miscellaneous
 127. Appointment of Justices
 128. Tenure of Office
 129. Salaries, etc.
 130. Judicial Oath
 131. Judicial Council
 132. Appointment of Other Judicial Officers
 133. Rules of Court
 134. Officers and Servants of Courts
 135. Fees and Fines
 136. Discovery of Oficial Documents
 137. Succession of Courts
 CHAPTER TIRTEEN
 FINANCE
 General
 138. Taxation
 139. The Consolidated Fund
 140. Withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund, etc.
 141. Authorisation of Expenditure
 142. Expenditure in advance of Appropriation
 143. Contingency Fund, etc.
 144. Loans
 145. Public Debt
 146. The Central Bank
 147. Foreign Exchange Dealings
 148. Foreign Participation in Business, etc.
 
 Xi
 
 
 The Statistical Service
 Irticle
 149. Statistical Service
 150. Statistical Service Board
 The Auditor-General
 151. The Auditor-General
 The Audit Service
 152. The Audit Service
 153. The Audit Service Board
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 THE PUBLIC SERVICES
 154. The Public Services
 155. Protection for Public Officers
 156. The Public Services Commission
 157. Appointments, etc. of Public Officers
 158. Other Functions of the Public Services Commission
 159. Establishment of Public Corporations
 160. Head of the Civil Service
 161. Existing Offices
 162. Retiring Age
 CHAPTER FiFTEEN
 THE PRISONS SERVICE
 163. The Prisons Service
 164. The Prisons Service Council
 165. Functions of the Prisons Service Council
 166. Regional Prisons Committees
 
 Xi
 
 
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN
 
 THE ARMED FORCES OF GHANA
 Article
 167. The Aimed Forces of Ghana
 168. The Armed Forces Council
 169. Appointments, etc.
 170. Delegation of Functions
 171. Functions of the Armed Forces Council
 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
 THE POLICE SERVICE
 172. The Police Service
 173. The Police Council
 174. Functions of the Police Council
 175. Regional Police Committees
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
 NATIONAL SERVICE
 176. National Service Board
 CHAPTER NINETEEN
 CHIEFTAINCY
 177. Institution of Chieftaincy
 178. National House of Chiefs
 179. National Chieftaincy Tribunal
 180. Regional House of Chiefs
 181. Definition of Chief
 
 xii
 
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY
 
 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
 Article
 182. Local Government Councils
 183. District Councils, etc.
 184. Local Government Grants Commission
 185. Regional Councils
 186. Ministers of State for the Regions
 187. Local Government Legislation
 CHAPTER TwENTY-oNE
 LANDS
 Public Lands
 188. Public Land and Other Public Property
 The Lands Commission
 189. The Lands Commission
 Stool Lands
 190. Stool and Skin Lands and Other Property
 191. Natural Resources Commissions
 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
 THE PRESS COMMISSION
 192. Establishment of the Press Commission
 193. Functions of the Press Commission
 194. Independence of Journalists
 195. Prohibition of Press Licences
 
 -X1v
 
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
 
 COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY
 Article
 196. Appointment of Commission of Inquiry
 197. Powers of Commission of Inquiry
 198. Functions of Commission of Inquiry
 199. Inquiry Procedure
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
 CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PUBLIC OFFICERS
 200. Conflict of Interest
 201. Other Public Appointments
 202. Gifts or benefits in kind
 203. Bribery of Public Officers
 204. Abuse of Powers
 205. Declaration of Assets
 206. Managing Assets of Public Officers
 207. Complaints of Contravention
 208. Agents, Nominees, etc.
 209. Interpretation
 CHArpBR TWENTY-FIVE
 AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
 210. Amendments to the Constitution
 CHAPTER TwENTY-six
 MISCELLANEOUS
 211. Claims against Government
 212. Legal Aid
 213. Interpretation
 214. Exercise of Discretionary Power
 215. Implied Power
 216. Residual Powers of Parliament
 217. Transitional Provisions
 
 xv
 
 
 FIRST SCHEDULE
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 PART I
 FIRST PRESIDENT
 PART 11
 FIRST PARLIAMENT
 PART III
 THE JUDICIARY
 PART IV
 MISCELLANEOUS
 PART V
 PUBLIC CORPORATIONS
 
 xvi
 
 
 SECOND SCHEDULE
 
 FORMS OF OATH
 The Oath of Allegiance
 The Presidential Oath
 Oath of the Vice-President
 The Judicial Oath
 Oath of Councillor of State
 The Cabinet Oath
 The Oath of Minister of State
 The Oath of Secrecy
 The Official Oath
 The Speaker's Oath
 The Oath of a Member of Parliament
 The Oath of the Auditor-General
 xvi
 
 2
 
 
 
 THE CONSTITUTION
 
 OF THE
 REPUBLIC OF GHANA
 IN THE NAME OF THE ALMIGHTY GOD
 E the People of Ghana,
 IN EXERCISE of our natural and inalienable right to
 establish a framework of government which shall
 secure for ourselves and our posterity the blessings
 of liberty and prosperity,
 IN A SPIRIT of friendship and peace with all peoples of
 the world,
 AND IN SOLEMIN declaration and affirmation of our
 Faith in
 Freedom and Justice
 The Principle that all powers of Government spring
 from the Sovereign Will of the People
 
 2
 
 
 The Principle of Universal Adult Suffrage, without
 any distinction whatsoever
 The Rule of Law
 The protection and preservation of Fundamental
 Human Rights, Unity and Stability for our Nation
 DO HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OUR-
 SELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER ONE
 THE CONSTITUTION
 1. (1) The sovereignty of Ghana resides in the people of suR fACY
 Ghana in whose name and for whose welfare the powers of CoNSITrU-
 government are to be exercised in the manner and within TION.
 the limits laid down in this Constitution.
 (2) This Constitution shall be the supreme law of
 Ghana and any other law found to be inconsistent with any
 provision of this Constitution shall, to the extent of the
 inconsistency, be void and of no effect.
 (3) All citizens of Ghana shall have the right to resist
 any person or persons seeking to abolish the constitutional
 order as established by this Constitution should no other
 remedy be possible.
 2. (1) A person who alleges-                        ENFORCE-
 M4ENT OF THE
 (a) that an enactment or anything contained in or coNsrm-
 done under the authority of that or any other TION.
 enactment, or
 (b) that any act or omission of any person,
 is inconsistent with, or is in contravention of, a provision of
 this Constitution, may at any time bring an action in the
 Supreme Court for a declaration to that effect.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall, for the purposes of a
 declaration under clause (1) of this article make such orders
 and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for
 giving effect to, or enabling effect to be given to, the declara-
 tion so made.
 (3) Any person to whom an order or direction is
 addressed under clause (2) of this article by the Supreme
 Court shall duly obey and carry out the terms of the order
 or direction.
 (4) Failure to obey or carry out the terms of an order
 or direction made or given under clause (2) of this article
 shall constitute a high crime under this Constitution.
 
 3
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) For a high crime under clause (4) of this article,
 any such person upon conviction,
 (a) shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not
 exceeding ten years; and
 (b) shall not be eligible for election, or for appoint-
 ment, to any public office for a period of ten
 years beginning from the date of the expiration
 of the term of imprisonment.
3. (1) Parliament shall have no power to enact a law establishing a one-party state.
 (2) Any activity of a person, persons or group of persons which suppresses or seeks to suppress the lawful political activity of any other person or persons generally
 or any class of persons shall be an unlawful act.
 (3) Where any activity is found to be unlawful under
 clause (2) of this article, the Supreme Court shall, for the
 first offence,
 (a) grant an injunction against the person, persons
 or group of persons, as the case may be, from
 carrying on any further the activity complained
 of; and
 (b) bind the person, persons or group of persons,
 as the case may be, over to be of good behaviour
 for a period of five years;
 and for a second or subsequent offence, any such person,
 persons or group of persons shall be liable to imprisonment
 for a term not exceeding ten years and in addition any
 person so convicted shall not be eligible for election to
 Parliament or for election to a local government council or
 be eligible for appointment to any public office for a period
 of ten years beginning from the date of the expiration of
 the term of imprisonment.
 
 4
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER Two
 THE LAWS OF GHANA
 4. (1) The laws of Ghana shall comprise,             THELAWS
 OF GHANA*
 (a) this Constitution;
 (b) enactments made by or under the authority of
 the Parliament established by this Constitution;
 (c) any Orders, Rules and Regulations made by
 any person or authority pursuant to a power
 conferred in that behalf by this Constitution;
 (d) the existing law; and
 (e) the common law.
 (2) The common law of Ghana shall comprise 'the
 rules of law generally known as the common law, the rules
 generally known as the doctrines of equity and the rules of
 customary law including those determined by the Superior
 Court of Judicature.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "customary law" means the rules of law which by custom
 are applicable to particular communities in Ghana.
 (4) The existing law shall, except as otherwise pro-
 vided in clause (1) of this article, comprise the written and
 unwritten laws of Ghana as they existed immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution, and any Act,
 Decree or statutory instrument issued or made before that
 date, which is to come into force on or after that date.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of this article, the opera-
 tion of the existing law after the coming into force of this
 Constitution shall not be affected by such commencement.
 (6) For the purposes of clause (5) of this article, the
 existing law shall be construed with such modifications,
 adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be
 necessary to bring it into conformity with the provisions of
 this Constitution, or otherwise to give effect to, or enable
 effect to be given to, any changes effected by this Constitu-
 tion.
 
 5
 
 
 The Constitution
 (7) Any Orders, Rules or Regulations made by any
 person or authority under a power conferred in that
 behalf by this Constitution or any other law,
 (a) shall be laid before Parliament;
 (b) shall be published in the Gazette on the day
 they are so laid before Parliament; and
 (c) shall come into force at the expiration of a
 period of twenty-one sitting days of being so
 laid unless Parliament before the expiration of
 that period of twenty-one days, annuls any such
 Orders, Rules or Regulations by the votes of
 not less than two-thirds of all the members of
 Parliament.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER THREE
 THE TERRITORIES OF GHANA
 5. (1) The sovereign state of Ghana is a unitary repub- TERRITORIES
 lic consisting of those territories comprised in the Regions OF GHANA.
 which, immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution, existed in Ghana including the territorial
 waters and the air space.
 (2) Parliament may provide by law for the delimita-
 tion of the territorial waters, the contiguous zone and the
 exclusive economic maritime zone of Ghana.
 (3) Whenever on a petition presented in that behalf
 the President and the Council of State are satisfied that
 there is a substantial demand for,
 (a) the creation of an additional Region, or
 (b) the alteration of the boundaries of a Region,
 whether or not the alteration involves the
 creation of a new Region, or
 (c) the merger of any two or more Regions,
 the President shall, acting in accordance with the advice
 of the Council of State, appoint a commission of inquiry
 to inquire into the demand and to make recommendations
 on all the factors involved in any such creation, alteration
 or merger.
 (4) Whenever a commission of inquiry appointed
 under clause (3) of this article is satisfied that there is the
 need and a substantial demand for the creation, alteration
 or merger as is referred to in that clause, it shall recommend
 to the President that a referendum shall be held specifying
 the issues to be determined by the referendum and the
 places where the referendum should be held.
 (5) The President shall refer the recommendations to
 the Electoral Commission, and the referendum shall be
 conducted in such manner as the Electoral Commission
 may prescribe.
 
 7
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) At a referendum held pursuant to clause (4) of
 this article no results shall be declared by the Electoral
 Commission in respect of any issue for determination by the
 referendum unless fifty per centum or more of the persons
 entitled to vote cast their votes and of those who voted
 eichty per centum or more cast their votes in favour of,
 or against, any of the issues to be determined by the
 referendum.
 (7) Where a referendum involves the merger of two or
 more Regions, no results shall be declared by the Electoral
 Commission unless sixty per centum or more of the persons
 entitled to vote at the referendum in each such Region voted
 in favour of, or against, the merger of the two or more
 Regions; and accordingly the provisions of clause (6) of
 this article shall not apply to any such referendum.
 (8) The President shall, acting in accordance with the
 results of the referendum held pursuant to clauses (4)
 and (5) of this article, issue a constitutional instrument
 giving effect, or enabling effect to be given, to any such
 results.
 
 8
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FouR
 DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
 6. (1) It shall be the duty and responsibility of all Govern- IMMTA-
 * TON OF
 ment organs, authorities and persons exercising legislative, movsNS.
 executive or judicial powers to conform to, observe and
 apply the provisions of this Chapter of this Constitution.
 (2) The Government shall report to Parliament at
 least once a year all the steps it has taken to ensure the
 realization of the policy objectives contained in this Chapter,
 and in particular the realization of a healthy economy, the
 right to work, the right to good health care and the right to
 education.
 7. (1) The Government shall actively encourage national NATIONAL
 . INTEGRATION
 integration without discrimination on the grounds of place AND UNY.
 of origin, ethnic origin, sex or religion; and accordingly
 Parliament shall enact such laws as will,
 (a) foster a feeling of belonging and of involve-
 ment among the various peoples of Ghana,
 to the end that loyalty to Ghana shall override
 sectional, ethnic or other loyalties;
 (b) provide adequate facilities for, and encourage,
 free mobility of people, goods and services
 throughout Ghana; and
 (c) decentralize the administrative machinery to
 the Regions and districts in order to permit,
 to the extent consistent with sound and effec-
 tive administration and control, the transaction
 of Government business at the regional and
 district levels.
 (2) The Government shall take all steps to eradicate
 all corrupt practices and the abuse of power.
 8. (1) The Government shall, within the context of the ousenvEs
 ideals and objectives for which provision is made in this     e
 Constitution, endeavour to manage the national economy
 in such a manner as to secure the maximum welfare,
 freedom and happiness of every citizen of Ghana on the
 basis of social justice and equality of opportunity.
 
 9
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) For the purposes of clause (1) of this article the
 Government shall present to Parliament within eighteen
 months after assuming office a programme which shall
 ensure the promotion of planned and balanced economic
 development including planned and co-ordinated agricul-
 tural and industrial programmes at all levels and in all the
 Regions of Ghana.
 OBJECIVES 9. (1) In furtherance of the social order founded on the
 FacrA    ideals and principles of freedom, equality and justice as
 enshrined in Chapter Six of this Constitution, the Govern-
 ment shall ensure by legislation-
 (a) that every citizen shall have equality of rights,
 obligations and opportunities before the law;
 (b) that the sanctity of the human person and
 human dignity is recognised, maintained and
 enhanced;
 (c) that human exploitation in whatever form is
 prevented; and
 (d) that the independence, impartiality, integrity
 and easy accessibility of the courts of law are
 secured and maintained.
 (2) Parliament shall enact such laws as will ensure,
 (a) that all citizens, without discrimination on
 any ground have the opportunity for securing
 adequate means of livelihood as well as
 adequate opportunities to secure suitable
 employment;
 (b) that provision is made for public assistance
 for those in need and the conditions under
 which such assistance may be given;
 (c) that conditions of work are just and humane,
 and that there are adequate facilities for leisure
 and for social and cultural life;
 (d) that the health, safety and welfare of all
 persons in employment shall be safeguarded
 and not endangered or abused;
 (e) that there are adequate medical and ..health
 facilities for all persons and measures to
 improve the environment;
 
 10
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (f that there is equal pay for equal work without
 discrimination on account of sex;
 (g) that children, young persons, the aged, the
 infirm and the handicapped are protected
 against exploitation and against moral and
 material neglect;
 (h) that traditional cultural values are adapted
 and developed as an integral part of the grow-
 ing needs of the society as a whole;
 (i) that adequate retiring awards are provided for
 all public servants;
 (j) that contributory schemes are instituted and
 maintained that will provide economic security
 for self-employed and other citizens of Ghana;
 and
 (k) the establishment and maintenance of a scheme
 that will provide unemployment benefits and
 adequate old age pensions for all citizens of
 Ghana.
 (3) For the purposes of clauses (1) and (2) of this
 article, the expression "exploitation" includes the unfair
 utilization of the resources, performance or achievement of
 a person for the benefit of some other person.
 10. (1) The Government shall endeavour to provide OBACHVES or
 equal and adequate educational opportunities in all fields EDuCTONAL
 and at all levels for the people of Ghana.
 (2) The Government shall within two years after the
 coming into force of this Constitution draw up a programme
 for implementation within the following ten years for free,
 compulsory and universal primary education.
 (3) The Government shall, subject to the availability
 of resources provide,
 (a) free and equal access to secondary and other
 appropriate pre-university education;
 (b) free and equal access to university or equiva-
 lent education;
 (c) free adult literacy programme;
 (d) life-long education; and
 (e) free vocational training, rehabiltation and
 resettlement of disabled persons.
 11
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 U"*NA*     11. The Government shall conduct its international
 RoMs.    affairs in consonance with the principles enshrined in the
 Charter of the United Nations, and the Charter of the
 Organisation of African Unity, in a manner consistent with
 the national interests of Ghana.
 
 12
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FIVE
 CITIZENSHIP
 12. Every person who, on the coming into force of this cmZENS OF
 Constitution, is a citizen by law of Ghana shall continue to GHANA.
 be such a citizen of Ghana.
 13. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  PESONS
 BORN IN OR
 (a) a person born in Ghana after the coming into OUTSIDE
 force of this Constitution shall become a GHAn.
 citizen of Ghana at the date of his birth if
 either of his parents or grandparents is or was
 a citizen of Ghana;
 (b) a person born outside Ghana after the coming
 into force of this Constitution shall become a
 citizen of Ghana at the date of his birth if
 either of his parents is or was a citizen of
 Ghana.
 14. (1) A child of not more than seven years of age found FoUDuS
 in Ghana whose parents are not known shall be presumed ETC.
 to be a citizen of Ghana by birth.
 (2) A child of not more than sixteen years of age
 neither of whose parents is a citizen of Ghana who is
 adopted by a citizen of Ghana shall, by virtue of the adop-
 tion, be a citizen of Ghana.
 15. (1) A woman who, on the coming into force of this PERSONS
 ENTITLED
 Constitution, is or has been married to a person,      O BE
 REOISTERED
 (a) who is or becomes a citizen of Ghana by AS CITIZENS.
 virtue of the provisions of article 12 of this
 Constitution, or
 (b) who, having died before the coming into
 force of this Constitution would, but for his
 death, have become a citizen of Ghana by
 virtue of that article,
 may, upon making an application therefor in such manner
 as may be prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a
 citizen of Ghana.
 
 13
 
 
 The Constitution
 (2) A woman who is married to a person who
 subsequently becomes a citizen of Ghana may, upon
 making an application thereforin sich manner as may be
 prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a citizen of
 Ghana.
 (3) A woman who, after', fle coming into force of
 this Constitution, marries a citizeii of Ghana may, upon
 making an application therefor in :such-manner as may
 be prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a citizen of
 Ghana.
 (4) Where the marriage of any such woman as is
 referred to in the preceding provisions of this article is
 annulled, the woman having registered as a citizen of Ghana
 by virtue of that marriage, shall, unless she applies to the
 High Court of Justice for such relief as shall be determined
 by the Court, cease to be a citizen of Ghana.
 (5) A man who, on or after the coming into force of
 this Constitution, is married to, or marries, a woman who
 is a citizen of Ghana may, upon making an application
 therefor in such manner, and subject to such conditions,
 as may be prescribed by Parliament, be registered as a
 citizen of Ghana where the marriage of that man-
 (a) was or is contracted under a monogamous
 system of marriage; and
 (b) has subsisted, at the time of the application,
 for a continuous period of not less than five
 years.
 (6) The provfsions of clause (5) of this article shall
 apply only where the applicant is permanently resident in
 Ghana.
 DUAL       16. (1) A person who, upon the attainment of the age
 CITIZENSHIP. of twenty-one years, is a citizen of Ghana and also a citizen
 of some country other than Ghana shall, subject to the
 provisions of clause (7) of this article, cease to be a citizen
 of Ghana upon the specified date unless,
 (a) he has renounced his citizenship of that other
 country; and
 
 14
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) he has, in the case of a citizen of Ghana born
 outside Ghana, made and registered such
 declaration of his intentions concerning resi-
 dence as may be prescribed by Parliament.
 (2) A person who
 (a) has attained the age of twenty-one years on
 the coming into force of this Constitution, and
 (b) becomes a citizen of Ghana on that day by
 virtue of the provisions of article 12 of this
 Constitution, and
 (c) is on or after that day also a citizen of some
 country other than Ghana,
 shall, subject to the provisions of clause (7) of this article,
 cease to be a citizen of Ghana upon the specified date
 unless he has renounced his citizenship of that other country
 and taken the oath of allegiance.
 (3) A citizen of Ghana shall cease to be a citizen of
 Ghana if, having attained the age of twenty-one years,
 (a) he acquires the citizenship of some country
 other than Ghana by voluntary act, other than
 marriage; or
 (b) he otherwise acquires the citizenship of some
 country other than Ghana and has not, by the
 specified date, renounced his citizenship of
 that other country, taken the oath of allegiance
 and made and registered such declaration of
 his intentions concerning residence as may be
 prescribed by Parliament.
 (4) Where the law of a country, other than Ghana,
 requires a person who marries a citizen of that country to
 renounce his citizenship of his own country by virtue of
 that marriage, a citizen of Ghana who is deprived of his
 citizenship of Ghana by virtue of that marriage shall, on
 the dissolution of that marriage if he thus loses his citizen-
 ship acquired by that marriage, become a citizen of Ghana.
 (5) A person who-
 (a) becoms a citizen of Ghana by registration
 under the provisions of article 15 of this
 Constitution, and-
 15
 3
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) is, immediately after the day upon which he
 becomes a citizen of Ghana, also a citizen of
 some other country,
 shall, subject to the provisions of clause (7) of this article,
 cease to be a citizen of Ghana upon the specified date unless
 he has renounced his citizenship of that other country,
 taken the oath of allegiance and made and registered such
 declaration of his intentions concerning residence as may be
 prescribed by Parliament.
 (6) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "specified date " means, in relation to a person-
 (a) to whom clause (1) of this article refers, the
 date on which he attains the age of twenty-one
 years or the date of the coming into force of
 this Constitution whichever is later; or
 (b) to whom clause (2) of this article refers, the
 date on which he also became a citizen of
 some country other than Ghana; or
 (c) to whom paragraph (b) of clause (3) and clause
 (5) of this article refer, the date on which his
 citizenship will ordinarily operate; or
 in the case of a person of unsound mind, such later date as
 may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (7) Provision may be made by or under an Act of
 Parliament for extending beyond the specified date the
 period in which any person may make a renunciation of
 citizenship, take an oath or make or register a declaration
 for the purposes of this article; and where such provision
 is made that person shall not cease to be a citizen of Ghana
 upon the specified date but shall cease to be such a citizen
 upon the expiration of the extended period if he has not
 then made the renunciation, taken the oath or made or
 registered the declaration, as the case may be.
 CITIZENSHIP  17. (1) Parliament may make provision for the acquisi-
 LAWS BY
 PARLWNT. tion of citizenship of Ghana by persons who are not eligible
 or who are no longer eligible to become citizens of Ghana
 under the provisions of this Chapter.
 16
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) Except as otherwise provided in article 15 of this
 Constitution, no person shall be registered to be a citizen of
 Ghana unless at the time of his application for registration
 he is able to speak and understand an indigenous language
 of Ghana.
 (3) The High Court of Justice may, on an application
 made in that behalf by the Attorney-General, deprive a
 person who is a citizen of Ghana, otherwise than by birth,
 of that citizenship on the ground-
 (a) that the activities of that person are inimical to
 the security of the State or prejudicial to public
 morality or the public interest; or
 (b) that that citizenship was acquired by fraud,
 misrepresentation or any other improper or
 irregular practice.
 (4) There shall be published in the Gazette by the
 appropriate authority and within three months thereof the
 name, particulars and other details of a person who,
 pursuant to the provisions of this article-
 (a) applies to be registered as a citizen of Ghana;
 or
 (b) has been registered as a citizen of Ghana.
 (5) Parliament may make provision for the renuncia-
 tion by any person of his citizenship of Ghana.
 18. (1) A reference in this Chapter to the national status INTERPRETA
 of the parent of a person at the time of the birth TION.
 of that person shall, in relation to a person born after the
 death of the parent, be construed as a reference to the
 national status of the parent at the time of the parent's death.
 (2) For the purposes of clause (1) of this article,
 where the death occurred before the coming into force of
 this Constitution, the national status that the parent would
 have had if he or she had died on the coming into force of
 this Constitution shall be deemed to be his or her national
 status at the time of his or her death.
 17
 3A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER Six
 FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS
 Liberty of the Individual
 -   19. Every person in Ghana, whatever his race, place of
 RHS AM  origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, shall be
 FREEDOMS  entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the
 HEU.  individual contained in this Chapter. but subject to respect
 for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public
 interest.
 PROTECTION  20. (1) No person shall be deprived of his life intention-
 TUGE   ally except in the execution of the sentence of a Court in
 respect of a criminal offence under the law of Ghana of
 which he has been convicted.
 (2) Without prejudice to any liability for a contraven-
 tion of any other law with respect to the use of force in
 such cases as are hereinafter mentioned, a person shall not
 be regarded as having been deprived of his life in contra-
 vention of this article if he dies as the result of a lawful act
 of war, or if he dies as the result of the use of force to such
 an extent as is reasonably justifiable in the circumstances of
 the case, that is to say,
 (a) for the defence of any person from violence or
 for the defence of property; or
 (b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent
 the escape of a person lawfully detained; or
 (c) for the purposes of suppressing a riot, insur-
 rection or mutiny; or
 (d) in order to prevent the commission by that
 person of a criminal offence.
 PROTECTON 21. (1) NO person shall be deprived of his personal
 OF RIGHT TO 21(1Nopro         shlbedpieofhsesna
 PERSOMAL  liberty except as may be authorised by law in any of the
 LIBERTY.  following cases, that is to say,
 (a) in execution of the sentence or order of a
 Court in respect of a criminal offence of which
 he has been convicted; or
 
 18
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) in execution of the order of a Court punishing
 him for contempt of court; or
 (c) in execution of the order of a Court made
 to secure the fulfilment of an obligation
 imposed on him by law; or
 (d) for the purposes of bringing him before a
 Court in execution of the order of a Court; or
 (e) upon reasonable suspicion of having com-
 mitted, or being about to commit, a criminal
 offence under the law of Ghana; or
 (f) for the purposes of the education or welfare
 of a person' who has not attained the age of
 majority; or
 (g) for the purposes of preventing the spread of
 an infectious or contagious disease; or
 (h) for the purposes of the care or treatment or
 the protection of the community, where a
 person is, or is reasonably suspected to be, of
 unsound mind, addicted to drugs or alcohol,
 or a vagrant; or
 (i) for the purposes of preventing the unlawful
 entry of that person into Ghana, or for the
 purposes of effecting the expulsion, extradi-
 tion or other lawful removal of that person
 from Ghana or for the purposes of restricting
 that person while he is being lawfully conveyed
 through Ghana in the course of his extradi-
 tion or removal from one country to another.
 (2) A person who is arrested, restricted or detained
 shall be informed immediately, in a language that he under-
 stands, of the reasons for his arrest, restriction or detention
 and of his right to consult counsel of his own choice.
 (3) A person who is arrested, restricted or detained,
 (a) for the purposes of bringing him before a
 Court in execution of the order of a Court, or
 (b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having com-
 mitted, or being about to commit, a criminal
 offence under the law of Ghana,
 
 19
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 and who is not released, shall be brought before a Court
 within twenty-four hours.
 (4) Where a person arrested, restricted or detained
 in any circumstance as is mentioned in paragraph (b) of
 clause (3) of this article is not tried within a reasonable
 time, then, without prejudice to any further proceedings that
 may be brought against him-
 (a) he shall be released either unconditionally or
 upon reasonable conditions, including in
 particular such conditions as are reasonably
 necessary to ensure that he appears at a
 later date for trial or for proceedings preli-
 minary to trial; and
 (b) he shall not be arrested at any time on a
 charge arising from the facts in respect of
 which he was originally arrested.
 (5) A person who is unlawfully arrested, restricted
 or detained by any other person shall be entitled to compen-
 sation therefor from that other person.
 (6) Where a person is convicted and sentenced to a
 term of imprisonment any period he has spent in lawful
 custody before the completion of his trial shall be taken into
 account in imposing the term of imprisonment.
 (7) Where a person who has served the whole or
 part of his sentence is acquitted on appeal-
 (a) by a Court, other than the Supreme Court,
 the Court may certify to the Supreme Court
 that the person so acquitted be paid com-
 pensation; and the Supreme Court may, upon
 examination of all the facts and the certi-
 ficate of the Court concerned, award such
 compensation as it may think fit; or
 (b) by the Supreme Court, it may order compen-
 sation to be paid to the person so acquitted.
 (8) Subject to the provisions of article 89 of this Con-
 stitution Parliament shall have no power to enact legislation
 which retroactively imposes any limitation on, or adversely
 affects, the personal rights and liberties of any person.
 
 20
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 22. (1) No person shall be held in slavery or servitude. PROTEON
 FROM
 (2) No person shall be required to- perform forced s"70CED
 labour.                                                 LABOUR.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "forced labour " shall not include,
 (a) any labour required in consequence of the
 sentence or order of a Court; or
 (b) any labour required of a member of a disci-
 plined force in pursuance of his duties as such
 or, in the case of a person who has con-
 scientious objections to service as a member
 of a naval, military or air force, any labour
 that that person is required by law to perform
 in place of such service; or
 (c) any labour required during any period when
 Ghana is at war or in the event of an emer-
 gency or calamity that threatens the life and
 well-being of the community to the extent
 that the requiring of such labour is reasonably
 justifiable in the circumstances of any situation
 arising or existing during that period or as
 a result of that other emergency or calamity,
 for the purposes of dealing with the situation;
 or
 (d) any labour reasonably required as part of
 reasonable and normal communal or other
 civic obligations.
 23. (1) No person shall, whether or not be is arrested, PROTECrON
 restricted or detained, be subjected to-                INHUMAN
 (a) torture or inhuman or degrading punishment; TREATMENT.
 or
 (b) any other condition that detracts or is likely
 to detract from his dignity and worth as a
 human being.
 (2) A person who has not been convicted of a
 criminal offence shall not be kept or confined in a prison or
 treated as a convicted person and shall be kept away from
 convicted persons.
 
 21
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 PROTECMION
 FROM
 DEPRIVATION  24. (1) No property of any description shall be com-
 Or       pulsorily taken possession of, and no interest in, or right
 over, property of any description shall be compulsorily
 acquired by the State, except where the following conditions
 are satisfied, that is to say,
 (a) the taking of possession or acquisition is
 necessary in the interests of defence, public
 safety, public order, public morality, public
 health, town and country planning or the
 development or utilisation of any property in
 such manner as to promote the public benefit;
 and
 (b) the necessity therefor is clearly stated and is
 such as to afford reasonable justification for
 causing any hardship that may result to any
 person having an interest in, or right over, the
 prcperty; and
 (c) provision is made by a law applicable to the
 taking of possession or acquisition-
 (i) for the prompt payment of adequate
 compensation based on the current price
 of any such property; and
 (ii) securing to any person having an
 interest in, or right over, the property
 a right of access to the High Court of
 Justice, whether direct or on appeal
 from any other authority, for the
 determination of his interest or right,
 and the amount of any compensation
 to which he is entitled;
 and for the purposes of obtaining prompt pay-
 ment of that compensation.
 (2) Nothing in this article shall be construed as
 affecting the operation of any general law so far as it pro-
 vides for the taking of possession or acquisition of property,
 (a) by way of vesting or administration of trust
 property, enemy property or the property of
 persons adjudged or otherwise declared bank-
 rupt or insolvent, persons of unsound mind,
 22
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 deceased persons, or bodies corporate or
 unincorporated in the course of being wound
 up; or
 (b) in the execution of judgments or orders of
 Courts; or
 (c) by reason of its being in a dangerous state
 or injurious to the health of human beings,
 animals or plants; or
 (d) in consequence of any law with respect to the
 limitation of actions; or
 (e) for so long only as may be necessary for the
 purposes of any examination, investigation,
 trial or inquiry.
 (3) Nothing in this article shall be construed as affect-
 ing the making or operation of any law for the compulsory
 taking of possession in the public interest of any property
 or the compulsory acquisition in the public interest of any
 interest in, or right over, property, where that property,
 interest or right is held by a body corporate established by
 law for public purposes in which no moneys had been
 invested other than moneys provided by Parliament.
 (4) Any such property of whatever description com-
 pulsorily taken possession of, and any interest in, or right
 over, property of any description compulsorily acquired
 in the public interest or for public purposes, shall be used
 only in the public interest or for the public purposes for
 which it is taken or acquired.
 (5) Where any such property as is referred to in
 clause (4) of this article is not used in the public interest or
 for the public purposes for which it was acquired or taken
 the person who was the owner immediately before the com-
 pulsory possession or acquisition, as the case may be, shall
 be given the first option of acquiring that property, in which
 event he shall be required to refund the whole or such part
 of the compensation paid to him as may be agreed upon
 between the parties thereto; and in the absence of any
 such agreement such amount as shall be determined by the
 High Court of Justice.
 
 23
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 PROTECTION 25. (1) No person shall be subjected to the search of his
 FOR PIVACY*
 OR HNu  person or his property nor shall his property or premises
 AND OTHER  be entered into or intruded upon by others.
 PROPERTY.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision-
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of
 defence, public safety, public order, public
 morality, public health, town and country
 planning, the development and utilisation of
 mineral resources, or the development or
 utilisation of any other property in such a
 manner as to promote the public benefit; or
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purposes of
 promoting the rights or freedoms of other
 persons; or
 (c) that authorises an officer or agent of the
 Government of Ghana, a local government
 authority or a body corporate established by
 law for a public purpose to enter on the pre-
 mises of any person in order to carry out
 work connected with anything thereon for the
 purposes of any tax, rate or due or in order to
 carry out work connected with any property
 that is lawfully on those premises that belong
 to the Government, that authority or body
 corporate, as the case may be; or
 (d) for the purposes of enforcing the judgment or
 order of a Court in any civil proceedings;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to
 be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this Consti-
 tution.
 PROVSIONS   26. (1) Whenever a person is charged with a criminal
 TIO SECURE.                                 .
 PROTECTION offence, then, unless the charge is withdrawn, that person
 OF LAW.  shall be afforded a fair hearing within a reasonable time by
 a Court.
 
 24
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) A person who is charged with a criminal offence-
 (a) shall, in the case of an offence, other than
 treason, the punishment for which is death or
 imprisonment for life, be tried by a Judge and
 jury whose verdict shall be unanimous; and
 (b) shall be presumed to be innocent until he is
 proved or has pleaded guilty; and
 (c) shall be informed immediately in a language
 that he understands, and in detail, of the
 nature of the offence charged; and
 (d) shall be given adequate time and facilities for
 the preparation of his defence; and
 (e) shall be permitted to defend himself before the
 Court in person or by counsel of his own
 choice; and
 (f) shall be afforded facilities to examine in person
 or by his counsel the witnesses called by the
 prosecution before the Court, and to obtain
 the attendance and carry out the examination
 of witnesses to testify on his behalf before the
 Court on the same conditions as those apply-
 ing to witnesses called by the prosecution; and
 (g) shall be permitted to have, without payment
 by him, the assistance of an interpreter where
 he cannot understand the language used at the
 trial of the charge; and
 (h) shall, in the case of the offence of treason, be
 tried by the High Court of Justice duly consti-
 tuted by three Justices thereof;
 and except with his own consent, the trial shall not take
 place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to
 render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence
 impracticable and the Court has ordered him to be removed
 and the trial to proceed in his absence.
 (3) Whenever a person is tried for a criminal offence
 the accused person or a person authorised by him in that
 behalf shall, if he so requires, be given, within a reasonable
 time not exceeding six months after judgment, a copy for
 the use of the accused person of any record of the proceed-
 ings made by or on behalf of the Court.
 
 25
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal
 offence on account of an act or omission that did not at
 the time it took place constitute an offence.
 (5) No penalty shall be imposed for a criminal offence
 that is severer in degree or description than the maximum
 penalty that might have been imposed for that offence at
 the time when it was committed.
 (6) No person who shows that he has been tried by a
 competent Court for a criminal offence and either convicted
 or acquitted shall again be tried for that offence or any
 other criminal offence of which he could have been con-
 victed at the trial for the offence, except upon the order of
 a superior Court in the course of appeal or review proceed-
 ings relating to the conviction or acquittal.
 (7) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (6) of
 this article, an acquittal of a person on a trial for treason
 shall not be a bar to the institution of any proceedings for
 any other offence against that person.
 (8) The provisions of paragraph (a) of clause (2) of
 this article shall not apply in the case of trials by courts-
 martial or other military tribunals.
 (9) No person who is tried for a criminal offence
 shall be compelled to give evidence at the trial.
 (10) No person shall be convicted of a criminal
 offence unless that offence is defined and the penalty therefor
 is prescribed in a written law.
 (11) Nothing contained in clause (10) of this article
 shall prevent a Court of record from punishing a person for
 contempt of itself notwithstanding that the act or omission
 constituting the contempt is not defined in a written law and
 the penalty therefor is not so prescribed.
 (12) An adjudicating authority for the determination
 of the existence or extent of a civil right or obligation shall,
 subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be established
 by law and shall be independent and impartial; and where
 proceedings for such a determination are instituted by a
 person before any such adjudicating authority the case
 shall be given a fair hearing within a reasonable time.
 26
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (13) Except as may be otherwise ordered by the adjudi-
 cating authority in the interests of public morality, public
 safety, or public order the proceedings of any such adjudi-
 cating authority shall be in public.
 (14) Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an
 adjudicating authority from excluding from the proceedings
 persons, other than the parties thereto and their counsel, to
 such an extent as that authority-
 (a) may consider necessary or expedient in circum-
 stances where publicity would prejudice the
 interests of justice or any interlocutory pro-
 ceedings; or
 (b) may be empowered by law so to do in the
 interests of defence, public safety, public order,
 public morality, the welfare of persons under
 the age of majority or the protection of the
 private lives of persons concerned in the pro-
 ceedings.
 (15) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, the following provisions-
 (a) paragraph (b) of clause (2) of this article, to
 the extent that the law in question imposes
 upon a person charged with a criminal offence
 the burden of proving particular facts; or
 (b) clause (6) of this article, to the extent that
 the law in question authorises a Court to try a
 member of a disciplined force for a criminal
 offence notwithstanding any trial and convic-
 tion or acquittal of that member under the
 disciplinary law of the force, so however,
 that any Court so trying that member and
 convicting him shall, in sentencing him to any
 punishment, take into account any punishment
 awarded him under that disciplinary law.
 (16) Subject to the provisions of clause (17) of this
 article, treason shall consist only
 (a) in levying war against Ghana or assisting any
 state or person or inciting or conspiring with
 any person to levy war against Ghana; or
 
 27
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) in attempting by force of arms or other violent
 means to overthrow the organs of government
 established by or under this Constitution; or
 (c) in taking part or being concerned in or inciting
 or conspiring with any person to make or take
 part or be concerned in, any such attempt.
 (17) An act which aims at procuring by constitutional
 means an alteration of the law or of the policies of the
 Government shall not be considered as an act calculated to
 overthrow the organs of government.
 (18) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 article, but subject to the provisions of clause (19) of
 this article, Parliament may, by or under an Act of Parlia-
 ment, establish military courts or tribunals for the trial of
 offences against military law committed by persons subject
 to military law.
 (19) A person subject to military law, who, not being
 on active service, commits an offence cognisable by a civil
 Court, shall not be tried by a court-martial or military
 tribunal for any such offence unless the offence so committed
 is cognisable by the court-martial or other military tribunal
 under any law for the enforcement of military discipline.
 (20) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 criminal offence " means a criminal offence under the law
 of Ghana.
 PROTECHON 27. (1) No person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of
 FEEDOM OF his freedom of conscience; and for the purposes of this
 cONSCIENCE. article freedom  of conscience shall include freedom  of
 thought and of religion, freedom to change his religion or
 belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with
 others, and both in public and in private, to manifest and to
 propagate his religion or belief in worship, teaching, practice
 and observance.
 (2) No person who, by reason of tender years,
 minority, sickness or any other sufficient cause, is unable to
 give his consent shall be deprived by any other person of his
 right to medical treatment or education or to any other
 social or economic benefit by reason only of a religious
 or philosophical doctrine or belief.
 
 28
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) No person attending a place of education shall,
 except with his own consent, or, where he is a minor, the
 consent of his parents or guardian, be required to receive
 religious instruction or take part in or attend a religious
 ceremony or observance where that instruction, ceremony
 or observance relates to a religion or denominational
 practice other than his own.
 (4) No religious community or denomination shall
 be prevented from providing religious instruction for
 persons of that community or denomination in any educa-
 tional institution.
 (5) No person shall be compelled to take an oath
 which is contrary to his religion or belief or to take an oath
 in a manner which is contrary to his religion or belief.
 (6) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision which is reasonably required-
 (a) in the interests of defence, public safety, public
 order, public morality or public health; or
 (b) for the purposes of protecting the rights and
 freedoms of other persons, including the right
 to observe and practise any religion without
 the unsolicited intervention of members of any
 other religion;
 and except so far as the provision or, as the case may be, the
 thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to be
 reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this Constitu-
 tion.
 (7) Parliament shall have no power to legislate for the
 adoption of any religion as the religion of the Republic of
 Ghana.
 28. (1) There shall be no censorship in Ghana; and no POTCN
 person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his freedom  F PEM
 of expression, that is to say, freedom to hold opinions and SN.
 to receive and impart ideas and information without inter-
 ference, and freedom from interference with his correspon-
 dence.
 
 29
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) A person responsible for a state-owned medium
 for the dissemination of any kind of information to the
 public shall afford equal opportunities and facilities for the
 representation of opposing or differing views.
 (3) All agencies of the mass media shall at all times
 be free to uphold the principles, provisions and objectives
 of this Constitution and shall uphold the responsibility and
 accountability of the Government to the people of Ghana.
 (4) Nothing contained in or done under the-authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision-
 (a) that is reasonably required-
 (i) in the interests of defence, public
 safety, public order, public morality or
 public health, or to safeguard informa-
 tion the disclosure of which would be
 prejudicial to the security of the State;
 or
 (ii) for the purposes of protecting the
 reputations, rights and freedoms of
 other persons or the private lives of
 persons concerned in legal proceedings,
 preventing the disclosure of informa-
 tion received in confidence, maintaining
 the authority and independence of the
 Courts or regulating telephony, telegra-
 phy, posts, wireless broadcasting, tele-
 vision, public exhibitions or public
 entertainments; or
 (b) that imposes restrictions upon public officers;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to
 be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this Con-
 stitution.
 PROTECTION  29. (1) No person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of
 O """"    his freedom of assembly and association, that is to say, his
 AND ASSO-  right to assemble freely and associate with other persons
 CIATION.
 30
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 and in particular to form or belong to trade unions or other
 associations, national and international, for the protection of
 his interests.
 (2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision-
 (a) that is reasonably required in the interests of
 defence, public safety, public order, public
 morality, public health or the running of
 essential services; or
 (b) that is reasonably required for the purposes
 of protecting the rights or freedoms of other
 persons;
 and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be,
 the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not
 to be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this
 Constitution.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, freedom of assembly
 shall include freedom to hold peaceful processions and
 demonstrations.
 30. (1) No person shall be deprived of his freedom of PROTECION
 movement; and for the purposes of this article freedom of O RED
 movement means the right to move freely throughout MOr.MNT.
 Ghana, the right to reside in any part of Ghana, the right
 to leave and to enter Ghana and immunity from expulsion
 from Ghana.
 (2) A restriction on a person's freedom of movement
 that is involved in his lawful detention shall not be held to
 be inconsistent with, or in contravention of, this article.
 (3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision-
 (a) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of
 a Court, that are reasonably reauired in the
 
 31
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 interests of defence, public safety or public order,
 on the movement or residence within Ghana of
 any person; or
 (b) for the imposition of restrictions, by order of a
 Court, on the movement or residence' within
 Ghana of any person either in consequence of
 his having been found guilty of a criminal
 offence under the law of Ghana or for the
 purposes of ensuring that he appears before a
 Court at a later date for trial for such criminal
 offence or for proceedings relating to his extra-
 dition or lawful removal from Ghana; or
 (c) for the imposition of restrictions that are
 reasonably required in the interests of defence,
 public safety, public order, public morality,
 public health or the running of essential
 services, on the movement or residence within
 Ghana of any person or persons generally, or
 any class of persons, and except so far as that
 provision or, as the case may be, the thing
 done under the authority thereof, is shown
 not to be reasonably justifiable in terms of the
 spirit of this Constitution; or
 (d) for the imposition of restrictions on the free-
 dom of entry into Ghana, or of movement in
 Ghana, of a person who is not a citizen of
 Gbana; or
 (e) for the removal from Ghana, in accordance with
 the law governing extradition for the time being
 in force, of a person who is not a citizen of
 Ghana; or
 (f) for any of the purposes specified in paragraph
 (i) of clause (1) of article 21 of this Constitu-
 tion.
 (4) Whenever a person whose freedom of movement
 has been restricted by the order of a Court by virtue of
 such a provision as is referred to in paragraph (a) of clause
 (3) of this article so requests at any time during the period
 of that restriction not earlier than fourteen days after the
 
 32
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 order was made or three months after he last made such
 request, as the case may be, his case shall be reviewed by
 that Court.
 (5) On a review by a Court in pursuance of the provi-
 sions of clause (4) of this article of the case of a person
 whose freedom of movement has been restricted, the Court
 may, subject to the right to appeal therefrom, make such
 order for the continuation or termination of the restriction
 as it may consider necessary or expedient.
 31. (1) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4) and (5) Commn
 of this article, no law shall make any provision that is DISCRIMINA-
 discriminatory either in itself or in its effect. MON, ETC.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of clauses (4), (5), (6), (7)
 and (8) of this article, no person shall be treated in a discri-
 minatory manner by any person acting by virtue of any law
 or in the performance of the functions of any public office
 or any public authority.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "discriminatory" means affording different treatment to
 different persons attributable only or mainly to their
 respective descriptions by race, place of origin, political
 opinions, colour, sex, occupation or creed whereby persons
 of one such description are subjected to disabilities or
 restrictions to which persons of another such description
 are not made subject or are accorded privileges or advan-
 tages which are not accorded to persons of another such
 description.
 (4) The provisions of clause (1) of this article shall
 not apply to any law, so far as that law makes provision-
 (a) for the appropriation of public revenues or
 other public funds; or
 (b) with respect to adoption, marriage, divorce,
 burial, devolution of property on death or
 other matters of personal law; or
 (c) for the application in the case of members of
 a particular race or community of customary
 law with respect to any matter to the exclusion
 of any law with respect to that matter which
 is applicable in the case of other persons; or
 33
 4A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (d) whereby persons of such description as is
 mentioned in clause (3) of this article may be
 subjected to any disability or restriction or
 may be accorded any privilege or advantage
 which, having regard to its nature and to
 special circumstances pertaining to those per-
 sons or to persons of any other such descrip-
 tion, is reasonably justifiable in terms of the
 spirit of this Constitution.
 (5) The provisions of clause (1) of this article shall not
 apply to any law, so far as that law makes provision-
 (a) with respect to persons who are not citizens
 of Ghana; or
 (b) for the imposition of restrictions on the acqui-
 sition of land by, or on the economic and
 political activities of, a person who is not a
 citizen of Ghana.
 (6) The provisions of clause (2) of this article shall not
 apply to anything which is expressly or by necessary impli-
 cation authorised to be done by any such provision of law
 as is referred to in clauses (4) and (5) of this article.
 (7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority
 of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, this article to the extent that the law in
 question makes provision whereby persons of any such
 description as is mentioned in clause (3) of this article may
 be subjected to any restriction on the rights and freedoms
 guaranteed by articles 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30 of this Con-
 stitution, being such a restriction as is authorised by clause
 (2) of article 25, clause (6) of article 27, clause (4) of article
 28, clause (2) of article 29, or clause (3) of article 30, as the
 case may be.
 (8) Nothing contained in clause (2) of this article
 shall affect any discretion relating to the institution, con-
 duct or discontinuance of civil or criminal proceedings in
 any Court that is vested in any person by or under this Con-
 stitution or any other law.
 
 34
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 32. (1) Where assistance, special care and facilities EQUA
 RIGHTS OP
 necessary for the maintenance, safety and development of a MOTHERS,
 woman as a mother are provided by or at the expense of the SPOUSES
 State, such assistance, special care and facilities shall be ic'..
 available to all mothers without discrimination.
 (2) No spouse may be deprived of a reasonable
 provision out of the estate of a spouse whether the estate be
 testate or intestate.
 (3) Parliament shall enact such laws as are necessary
 to ensure-
 (a) that every child shall have the right to the same
 measure of special care, assistance and main-
 tenance as is necessary for its development
 from its natural parents, except where such
 parents have effectively surrendered their rights
 and responsibilities in respect of the child in
 accordance with law;
 (b) that every child, whether or not born in wed-
 lock, shall be entitled to reasonable provision
 out of the estate of its parents;
 (c) that parents undertake their natural right and
 obligation on care, maintenance and upbring-
 ing of their children in co-operation with such
 institutions as Parliament may by law prescribe
 in such manner that in all cases the interests of
 the children are paramount;
 (d) that children and young persons receive special
 protection against exposure to physical and
 moral hazards; and
 (e) that the protection and advancement of the
 family as the unit of society are safeguarded.
 Emergency Powers
 33. (1) The President may, acting in accordance with the PRO1S1as
 advice of the Council of State, by Proclamation published in of wAR A
 the Gazette, declare that a state of public emergency exists PuBLIc
 in Ghana or in any part of Ghana for the purposes of the
 provisions of this Chapter.
 
 35
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 article, where a Proclamation is published under clause (1)
 of this article, the President shall place. immediately before
 Parliament the facts and circumstances leading to the
 declaration of the state of public emergency.
 (3) Parliament shall, within  seventy-two hours
 thereof, decide whether the Proclamation shall remain in
 force or shall be revoked; and the President shall act in
 accordance with the decisions of Parliament made in that
 behalf.
 (4) A declaration of a state of public emergency
 under the provisions of this article, if not sooner revoked,
 shall cease to have effect at thexexpiration of a period of
 seven days beginning with the date of publication of the
 declaration unless, before the expiration of that period, it is
 approved by a resolution passed in that behalf by a majority
 of all the members of Parliament.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of clause (7) of this
 article, a declaration of a state of public emergency approved
 by a resolution of Parliament under the provisions of
 clause (4) of this article shall continue in force until the
 expiration of a period of three months beginning with the
 date of its being so approved or until such earlier date as
 may be specified in the resolution.
 (6) Parliament may, by resolution, extend its approval
 of the declaration for periods of not more than one month
 at a time.
 (7) Parliament may, by a resolution passed in that
 behalf by-a majority of all the members of Parliament, at
 any time revoke a declaration of a state of public emergency
 approved by Parliament under the provisions of this article.
 (8) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared
 that the provisions of any enactment, other than an Act
 of Parliament, dealing with a state of public emergency
 declared under clause (1) of this article shall apply only to
 that part of Ghana where any such emergency exists.
 36
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (9) For the purposes of this article, a state of public
 emergency includes any action that has been taken or is
 immediately threatened by any persons or body of persons-
 (a) which is calculated to deprive the community
 of the essentials of life; or
 (b) which renders necessary the taking of measures
 which are requisite for securing the public
 safety, the defence of Ghana and the main-
 tenance of public order and of supplies and
 services essential to the life of the community.
 (10) Nothing contained in or done under the autho-
 rity of an Act of Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent
 with, or in contravention of articles 19 to 32 inclusive of
 this Constitution, to the extent that the Act in question
 authorises the taking during any period when a declaration
 of a state of public emergency under the provisions of
 this article is in force, of measures that are reasonably
 justifiable for the purposes of dealing with the situation that
 exists during that period.
 34. (1) Where a person is restricted or detained by virtue PERSONS
 of such a law as is referred to in clause (10) of article 33 of  R
 this Constitution, the following provisions shall apply, that EMERGENCY
 is to say,                                              LAS
 (a) he shall as soon as practicable and in any case
 not later than twenty-four hours after the
 commencement of the restriction or detention,
 be furnished with a statement in writing speci-
 fying in detail the grounds upon which he is
 restricted or detained, which statement shall be
 read or interpreted to the person restricted or
 detained as appropriate;
 (b) the spouse, parent, child or other available
 next of kin of any person so restricted or
 detained shall be informed of the detention or
 restriction within twenty-four hours of the
 commencement of the detention or restriction
 and be permitted access to the person at the
 earliest practicable opportunity and in any
 case within seventy-two hours of the commence-
 ment of the restriction or detention;
 
 37
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) not more than ten days after the commence-
 ment of his restriction, or detention, a
 notification shall be published in the Gazette
 stating that he has been restricted or detained
 and giving particulars of the provision of law
 under which his restriction or detention is
 authorised and the grounds of his restriction
 or detention;
 (d) not more than ten days after the commence-
 ment of his restriction or detention and there-
 after during his restriction or detention at
 intervals of not more than three months, his
 case shall be reviewed by a tribunal composed
 of not less than three Justices of the Supreme
 Court appointed by the Chief Justice and
 presided over by the Chief Justice or a Justice
 of the Supreme Court appointed by the Chief
 Justice; so however that the same tribunal
 shall not review more than once, the case of a
 person restricted or detained;
 (e) he shall be afforded every possible facility to
 consult counsel of his own choice who shall
 be permitted to make representations to the
 tribunal appointed for the review of the case of
 the restricted or detained person;
 (f) at the hearing of his case he shall be permitted
 to appear in person or by counsel of his own
 choice.
 (2) On a review by a tribunal in pursuance of this
 article of the case of a restricted or detained person, the
 tribunal shall have power to order the release of the person
 and the payment to him of adequate compensation or
 uphold the grounds of his restriction or detention and the
 authority by which the restriction or detention was ordered
 shall act accordingly.
 (3) In every month in which there is a sitting of
 Parliament a Minister of State authorised by the President
 shall make a report to Parliament of the number of persons
 restricted or detained by virtue of such a law as is referred
 to in clause (10) of article 33 of this Constitution and the
 
 38
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 number of cases in which the authority that ordered the
 restriction or detention has acted in accordance with the
 decisions of the tribunal appointed in pursuance of this
 article.
 (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (3) of
 this article the Minister referred to therein shall publish
 every month in the Gazette,
 (a) the number and the names and addresses of
 persons restricted or detained;
 (b) the number of cases reviewed by the tribunal;
 and
 (c) the number of cases in which the authority
 which ordered the restriction or detention has
 acted in accordance with the decisions of the
 tribunal appointed pursuant to the provisions
 of this article.
 (5) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared
 that at the end of an emergency declared under clause (1)
 of article 33 of this Constitution, a person in restriction or
 detention or in custody who has been detained, restricted
 or arrested as a result of the declaration of the emergency
 shall forthwith be released.
 Protection of Rights by the Courts
 35. (1) Where a person alleges that a provision of ENFORCE*
 articles 19 to 34 inclusive of this Constitution has been, PROTECTIVE
 or is being or is likely to be contravened in relation to him, PROVISIONS.
 then, without prejudice to any other action with respect to
 the same matter that is lawfully available, that person may
 apply to the High Court of Justice for redress.
 (2) The High Court of Justice shall, under clause (1)
 of this article, have power to issue such directions or orders
 or writs including writs or orders in the nature of habeas
 corpus, certiorari, mandamus prohibition, and quo warranto
 as it may consider appropriate for the purposes of enforcing,
 or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of
 articles 19 to 34 inclusive to the protection of which the
 person concerned is entitled.
 
 39
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) A person aggrieved by a determination of the
 High Court of Justice under the provisions of this article
 may appeal therefrom to the Court of Appeal with the right
 of a further appeal to the Supreme Court.
 (4) The Rules of Court Committee may, by consti-
 tutional instrument, make Rules of Court with respect
 to the practice and procedure of the Superior Court of
 Judicature for the purposes of this article.
 (5) The rights, duties, declarations and guarantees
 relating to the fundamental human rights specifically men-
 tioned in this Chapter shall not be regarded as excluding
 others not specifically mentioned which are considered to
 be inherent in democracy and intended to secure the free-
 dom and dignity of man.
 
 40
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER SEVEN
 REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
 36. A citizen of Ghana not being less than eighteen TM RIGHT
 years of age and of sound mind shall have the right to TO VOTE.
 vote; and accordingly he shall be entitled to be registered.
 as a voter for the purposes of public elections and referenda.
 37. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission which "
 . . .ELECTORA4L
 shall consist of a sole Commissioner who shall be known as wMowmoN.
 the Electoral Commissioner and who shall be responsible
 for the conduct and supervision of the registration of voters,
 the conduct and supervision of all public elections and
 referenda and the demarcation of electoral boundaries and
 such other functions as may be prescribed by law.
 (2) The Electoral Commissioner shall be appointed
 by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
 the Council of State.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified-
 (a) for appointment as the Electoral Commissioner
 if he is not qualified to be elected as a member
 of Parliament; or
 (b) to hold office as the Electoral Commissioner
 while he still holds any other public office or
 is a member of Parliament or if he has attained
 the age of sixty-five years.
 (4) The Electoral Commissioner when appointed
 shall enjoy the terms and conditions of service, other than
 such terms and conditions as relate to retiring awards, of a
 Justice of the Court of Appeal.
 (5) The provisions of article 205 of this Constitution
 relating to the declaration of assets and liabilities shall
 apply to the Electoral Commissioner.
 (6) Whenever the Electoral Commissioner dies,
 resigns, is removed from office or is absent from Ghana,
 or is by reason of illness unable to perform the functions
 of his office the President shall, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Council of State, appoint a person quali-
 fied to be appointed Electoral Commissioner to perform
 
 41
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 those functions until the assumption of office of the
 Electoral Commissioner, or until the appointment of a new
 Electoral Commissioner.
 (7) In the performance of any of his functions the
 Electoral Commissioner shall be subject only to this Con-
 stitution and shall not be subject to the direction or control
 of any other person or authority.
 (8) The Electoral Commissioner shall,
 (a) in the demarcation of the boundaries of
 constituencies and of wards for elections to
 Parliament and to local government councils,
 and
 (b) in the demarcation of the boundaries of the
 areas of authority of local government councils,
 be assisted by two ad hoc Commissioners who shall be
 appointed for that purpose by the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Council of State.
 (9) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Electoral
 Commission in respect of the demarcation of a boundary
 under the provisions of clause (1) of this article may appeal
 to a tribunal consisting of three persons appointed by the
 Chief Justice.
 (10) The appointment of officers and other employees
 of the staff of the Electoral Commission shall be made by
 the Electoral Commissioner acting in consultation with
 the Public Services Commission.
 (11) The administrative expenses of the Electoral
 Commission including all salaries, allowances and pensions
 payable to, or in respect of, persons serving with the Com-
 mission shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 SUPERVMN    38. (1) The Electoral Commissioner shall make Regula-
 ELCHON   tions, by constitutional instrument,
 AM
 REERENDA. (a) for the registration of voters, the conduct of
 public elections and referenda; and
 (b) for the efficient supervision of elections and
 referenda; and
 
 42
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) for the matters connected therewith, including
 regulations for voting by proxy.
 (2) At a referendum, other than a referendum held
 pursuant to clauses (4) and (5) of article 5 of this
 Constitution, no results shall be declared by the Electoral
 Commission unless fifty per centum or more of the persons
 entitled to vote cast their votes, and at least forty per
 centum of the persons entitled to vote cast their votes in
 favour of, or against any, of the issues to be determined by
 the referendum.
 39. (1) Ghana shall be divided into as many consti-
 tuencies as there are members of Parliament in such manner
 as the Electoral Commission may prescribe.
 (2) No constituency shall fall within more than one
 Region.
 (3) The boundaries of each constituency shall be
 such that the number of inhabitants thereof is as nearly
 equal to the population quota as is reasonably practicable.
 (4) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article, the
 number of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or
 less than the population quota in order to take account of
 means of communication, geographical features, density of
 population and area and boundaries of the Regions and
 other administrative or traditional areas.
 (5) The Electoral Commission shall review the divi-
 sion of Ghana into constituencies-
 (a) at intervals of not less than seven years, or
 (b) within twelve months of the publication of the
 enumeration figures after the holding of a
 census of the population of Ghana,
 whichever is earlier and may, subject to the provisions of
 article 75 of this Constitution, alter the constituencies in
 accordance with the provisions of this article to such an
 extent as it may consider desirable in the light of the review
 or by reason of the holding of the census of the population
 of Ghana.
 
 43
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 .   (6) Where the boundaries of a constituency estab-
 lished pursuant to the provisions of this article are altered,
 the alteration shall come into effect upon the next dissolu-
 tion of Parliament.
 (7) For the purposes of this article the expression
 "population quota" means the number obtained by divid-
 ing the number of inhabitants of Ghana by the number of
 constituencies into which Ghana is divided pursuant to the
 provisions of this article.
 VOTING AT 40. (1) At any public election or referendum voting
 ELECTIONS
 AND       shall be by secret ballot.
 REFERENDA.
 (2) Immediately after the close of the poll, the
 presiding officer shall, in the presence of such of the can-
 didates or their representatives and their polling agents
 as attend, proceed to count, at that polling station, the
 ballot papers and record the votes cast in favour of each
 candidate or question.
 (3) The presiding officer, the candidates or their
 representatives and the polling agents shall then sign a
 declaration stating,
 (a) the total number of voters entitled to vote at
 that polling station; and
 (b) the number of votes cast in favour of each
 candidate or question;
 and the presiding officer shall, there and then, announce the
 results of the voting at that polling station before communi-
 cating them to the returning officer.
 ELECTON OF 41. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, where at
 cANDIDATE. the close of nominations on the nomination day preceding
 a public election,
 (a) two or more candidates have been nominated
 the election shall be held and the candidate
 receiving the largest number of the votes cast
 shall be declared elected;
 (b) where only one candidate is nominated there
 shall be no election and that candidate shall
 be declared elected.
 
 44
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) Where for the purposes of a public election two
 or more candidates are nominated but at the close of
 nominations on the nomination day preceding the election
 only one candidate stands nominated, a further period of
 ten days shall be allowed for nomination of other candidates,
 and it shall not be lawful for any person so nominated
 within that period of ten days to withdraw his nomination.
 (3) Where at the close of nominations under clause
 (2) of this article only one candidate stands nominated
 there shall be no election and that candidate shall be
 declared elected.
 (4) Where at the close of nominations but before
 the election one of the candidates dies, a further period of
 ten days shall be allowed for nominations and where the
 death occurs at any time within twenty-five days of the
 election, the election in that constituency or ward shall
 be postponed.
 42. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article and of TH OROM-
 article 29 of this Constitution, a political party shall be P  C
 free to participate in shaping the political will of the people, PARn
 to disseminate information on political ideas, social and
 economic programmes of a national character, and to
 sponsor candidates for election to any public office.
 (2) The internal organization of a political party
 shall conform to democratic principles, and its aims and
 purposes shall not contravene, or be inconsistent with,
 any provision of this Constitution.
 (3) The sources of income and the accounts of a
 political party shall be published annually in the Gazette.
 (4) No political party shall have as a founding
 member or leader or member of its executive a person who
 is not qualified to be elected as a member of Parliament or
 to hold any other public office.
 (5) Notwithstanding the generality of clause (2) of
 this article, no political party shall be registered, or be
 permitted to operate as such, if-
 (a) the membership or leadership of that party
 is restricted to members of any particular
 tribal or ethnic group or religious faith; or
 
 45
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) the name, symbol, colour or motto of that
 party has any exclusive or particular signifi-
 cance or connotation to the members of any
 particular tribal or ethnic group or religious
 faith; or
 (c) that party is formed, for the sole purpose
 of securing, whether directly or indirectly,
 the welfare, advancement or interests of the
 members of any particular tribal or ethnic
 group, religious faith or community; or
 (d) the internal organization of that party does
 not conform to the principles of openness,
 fairness and impartiality.
 (6) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 and in furtherance of the preceding provisions of this
 article, Parliament shall, by law, regulate the functioning
 of political parties.
 (7) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "political party " includes any association of persons, by
 whatever name called, and whether corporate or unincor-
 porated, established or operated with the object, through
 the electoral processes,
 (a) of supporting or bringing about the election
 of candidates to public office; or
 (b) of striving for power and thereby gain control
 of, or influence, the actions of the Govern-
 ment.
 Rucnoms    43. Parliament shall have no power to enact a law to
 ON CERM
 OROPGANA. establish or authorise the establishment of a body or move-
 ment having the right or power to formulate or propagate
 a common programme or a set of objectives of a religious
 or political nature for the country.
 
 46
 
 
 77 Constitutton
 
 CHAPTER EIGHT
 THE EXECUTIVE
 The President
 44. (1) There shall be a President of the Republic of
 Ghana who shall be the Head of State and Head of Govern- oF GHANA.
 ment and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of
 Ghana.
 (2) The President shall take precedence over all other
 persons in Ghana; and in descending order the Vice-
 President, the Speaker of Parliament and the Chief Justice,
 shall take precedence over all other persons in Ghana.
 (3) The President shall receive such salary and allow-
 ances, and on retirement such gratuity or other allowances,
 as may be determined in accordance with the provisions
 of article 58 of this Constitution.
 (4) On retiring from office, the President shall be
 entitle to receive a pension together with such facilities as
 may be prescribed by Parliament on the recommendation
 of the Committee referred to in clause (2) of article 58 of
 this Constitution.
 (5) Where the President is removed from office under
 paragraph (c) of clause (1) of article 56 of this Constitution,
 he shall be entitled to such pension and other retiring
 awards and facilities as Parliament may prescribe on the
 recommendation of the Committee referred to in clause (2)
 of article 58 of this Constitution.
 (6) The salary and allowances payable to the President
 and any pension or gratuity payable to him on retirement
 shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (7) The salary, allowances and privileges of the
 President shall not be varied to his disadvantage while
 he holds office.
 (8) The pension payable to the President and the
 facilities available to him shall not be varied to his disadvan-
 tage during his lifetime.
 47
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (9) Without prejudice to the provisions of article 2
 of this Constitution, and subject to the operation of the
 prerogative writs, the President shall not, while in office,
 be liable to proceedings in any Court for the performance
 of his functions, or for any act done or omitted to be
 done, or purported to have been done or purporting to be
 done, in the performance of his functions, under this Con-
 stitution or any other law.
 (10) Subject to the provisions of clause (9) of this
 article, the President shall not, while in office, be personally
 liable to any civil or criminal proceedings whatsoever in
 any Court,
 (11) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause
 (10) of this article, and notwithstanding any provision in
 any law relating to the limitation of actions, it shall be law-
 ful to institute proceedings whether civil or criminal in any
 Court in Ghana against a former President within three
 years after his ceasing to hold office as President.
 (12) Before assuming office the President shall take
 and subscribe before Parliament, the oath of allegiance,
 and the presidential oath set out in the Second Schedule
 to this Constitution.
 EECUVB    45. (1) The executive authority of Ghana shall vest in
 AUTHORITY the President and shall be exercised in accordance with
 OP OHANA.  the provisions of this Constitution.
 (2) The executive authority of Ghana shall extend
 to the execution and maintenance of this Constitution and
 all laws made under this Constitution.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the functions conferred upon the President by the provisions
 of clause (1) of this article may be exercised by him either
 directly or through officers subordinate to him.
 (4) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution
 or by a law in accordance with this Constitution all execu-
 tive acts of Government shall be expressed to be taken in
 the name of the Presidents
 (5) A constitutional or statutory instrument or any
 other instrument made, issued or executed in the name of
 the President shall be authenticated by the signature of a
 
 48
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 Minister and the validity of that instrument which is so
 authenticated shall not be called in question on the grounds
 that it is not made, issued or executed by the President.
 46. The President shall not leave Ghana without prior ABSENCE
 notification issued under his hand and addressed to the MD OHANA.
 Speaker of Parliament.
 47. (1) There shall be a Vice-President of Ghana who THa vci-
 shall perform such functions as may be assigned to him by nme,
 this Constitution or by the President.                 SION TO THE
 (2) A  candidate for the office of Vice-President PREIDENCY.
 shall be designated by the President before the election of
 the President.
 (3) The provisions of article 49 of this Constitution
 shall apply to a candidate for election as Vice-President.
 (4) A candidate shall be deemed to be duly elected as
 Vice-President if the candidate who designated him as
 candidate for election to the office of Vice-President has
 been duly elected as President in accordance with the provi-
 sions of article 50 of this Constitution.
 (5) The Vice-President shall, before commencing to
 perform his functions as Vice-President, take and subscribe
 the oath of allegiance and the vice-presidential oath set
 out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 (6) Whenever the President dies, resigns or is removed
 from office, the Vice-President shall assume office as Presi-
 dent for the unexpired term of office of the President with
 effect from the date of the death, resignation or removal of
 the President.
 (7) Whenever the President is absent from Ghana or
 is for any other reason unable to perform the functions of
 his office the Vice-President shall perform the functions of
 the President until the President is able to perform his
 functions.
 (8) The Vice-President shall, before commencing to
 perform the functions of the President under the provisions
 of clause (6) of this article, take and subscribe the oath in
 relation thereto set out in the Second Schedule to this Consti-
 tution.
 49
 SA                .-
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (9) The Vice-President shall, upon assuming office as
 President under clause (6) of this article nominate a person
 to the office of Vice-President subject to approval by Par-
 liament.
 (10) Where the President and the Vice-President are
 both unable to perform the functions of the President the
 Speaker of Parliament shall perform those functions until
 the President or Vice-President is able to perform those
 functions or a new President assumes office, as the case may
 be.
 (11) The Speaker shall, before commencing to per-
 form the functions of the President under the provisions of
 clause (10) of this article, take and subscribe the oath of
 office in relation thereto.
 (12) Where the Speaker of Parliament assumes the
 office of President as a result of the death, resignation or
 removal from office of the President and the Vice-President,
 there shall be a presidential election within three months of
 that assumption of office.
 (13) The provisions of article 56 of this Constitution
 shall apply to the removal from office of the Vice-President.
 PUBLIC AND 48. There shall be a public seal and a presidential seal,
 SENTIAL the use and custody of which shall, subject to the provisions
 of this Constitution, be regulated by law.
 QUALPCA-    49. No person shall be qualified for election as the Presi-
 PREMi.   dent of Ghana unless-
 (a) he is a citizen of Ghana by birth, by reason of
 both of his parents being citizens of Ghana by
 birth, and does not in any way owe allegiance
 to any other country;
 (b) he has attained the age of forty years; and
 (c) he is a person who is otherwise qualified to be
 elected as a member of Parliament, except that
 the disqualifications set out in paragraphs (c),
 (d), (e) and (j) of clause (2) of article 76 of this
 Constitution shall not be remuved, in respect of
 any such person, by a presidential pardon or
 the lapse of time as provided for in clause (3)
 of that article.
 
 50
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 50. (1) A person shall not be a candidate in a presidential EMCHON OP
 election unless he is nominated for election as President by a
 document which-
 (a) is signed by him; and
 (b) is signed by not less than one hundred and
 twenty-eight persons qualified to be elected
 as members of Parliament two at least of
 whom come from, and are resident in, the area
 of authority of each district council; and
 (c) is delivered to the Electoral Commissioner on
 or before the day appointed as nomination day;
 and
 (d) designates a person to serve as Vice-President.
 (2) The election of the President shall be on the terms
 of universal adult suffrage and shall, subject to the pro-
 visions of this Constitution, be conducted in accordance
 with such Regulations as may be prescribed in that behalf
 by constitutional instrument by the Electoral Comnussioner
 and shall be held so as to begin-
 (a) where a President is in office, not earlier than
 four months nor later than one month before
 his term of office expires; and
 (b) in any other case, within three months after
 the office of President becomes vacant; and
 shall be held at such place and shall begin on such date as
 the Electoral Commissioner shall, by constitutional instru-
 ment, specify.
 (3) A person shall not be elected as President of
 Ghana unless at the presidential election the number of
 votes cast in his favour is more than fifty per centum of the
 total number of valid votes cast at the election.
 (4) Where at a presidential election there are more
 than two candidates and no candidate obtains the number
 or percentage of votes specified in clause (3) of this article
 a second election shall be held within twenty-one days after
 the previous election.
 (5) The candidates for a presidential election held
 under clause (4) of this article shall be the two candidates
 who obtained the two highest numbers of votes at the pre-
 vious election.
 
 51
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) Where at a presidential election three or more
 candidates obtain the two highest numbers of votes
 referred to in clause (5) of this article and unless there are
 withdrawals such that only two candidates remain, Parlia-
 ment shall, within one week after the presidential election,
 select two of such persons to be candidates at the second
 election to be held under clause (4) of this article.  .
 (7) A person qualified to be a candidate for a presiden-
 tial election under clause (5) of this article or for selection to
 be a candidate by Parliament under clause (6) of this article
 may, by writing under his hand, withdraw his candidature
 at any time before the date of the selection by Parliament
 or the date of such election.
 (8) For the selection of candidates under clause (6)
 of this article, Parliament shall vote by secret ballot and
 without prior debate.
 (9) Where after a second presidential election held
 under clause (4) of this article the two candidates obtain an
 equal number of votes, Parliament shall elect one of the two
 candidates as President by secret ballot and without prior
 debate.
 (10) An instrument which-
 (a) is executed under the hand and seal of the
 Electoral Commissioner, and
 (b) states that the person named in the instrument
 was declared elected as the President of Ghana
 at the election of the President,
 shall be prima facle evidence that the person named was so
 elected.
 HALLMnG-   51. (1) The validity of the election of the President may
 .cno, or be challenged only by a citizen of Ghana who may present a
 PRESDENT.  petition in that behalf to the Supreme Court within twenty-
 one days of the declaration of the result of the election in
 respect of which the petition is presented.
 (2) A declaration by the Supreme Court that the
 election of the President is not valid shall be without
 prejudice to anything done by the President before that
 declaration.
 
 52
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) The Rules of Court Committee shall, by constitu-
 tional instrument, make Rules of Court for the practice and
 procedure for petitions to the Supreme Court challenging
 the election of a President.
 52. The Electoral Commissioner shall, by constitutional THE PRESI-
 instrument, make Regulations for the purposes of giving ECTION
 effect to the provisions of article 50 of this Constitution.  REOLAIONS.
 53. (1) A person elected as President shall, subject to the TERM OF
 provisions of clause (3) of this article, hold office for a OFFICE.
 term of four years beginning with the date on which he is
 sworn in as President.
 (2) No person shall be elected to hold office as
 President of Ghana for more than two terms.
 (3) The office of President shall become vacant-
 (a) on the expiration of the period specified in
 clause (1) of this article; or
 (b) if the incumbent dies or resigns from the
 office or ceases to hold office under article 56
 of this Constitution.
 (4) The President may, by writing under his hand
 addressed to the Speaker of Parliament, resign from his
 high office of President.
 54. The President shall, at the beginning of each session PmEIMRHAL
 of Parliament and before a dissolution of Parliament, MAGS
 deliver to Parliament a message on the state of Ghana.
 55. (1) The President shall not, while he continues in CONDITIONS
 office as President,                                   OF OFaCE.
 (a) hold any other office of profit or emolument
 whether private or public and either directly or
 indirectly;
 (b) hold the office of chancellor or head of any
 university in Ghana.
 (2) The President shall not, on retiring from office as
 President, hold any office of profit or emolument except
 with the permission of Parliament, in any establishment
 either directly or indirectly, other than that of the State.
 
 53
 
 
 Oe Consttutida
 
 REMOVAL OF  56. (1) The President shall be removed from office if he is
 PREIDENT.  found, in accordance with the provisions of this article-
 (a) to have acted in wilful violation of the oath of
 allegiance and the presidential oath set out in
 the Second Schedule to, or of any other provi-
 sion of, this Constitution; or
 (b) to have conducted himself in a manner
 (i) which brings or is likely to bring the
 high office of President into hatred,
 ridicule or contempt; or
 (ii) prejudicial or inimical to the economy
 or the security of the State; or
 (c) to be incapable of performing the functions
 of his office by reason of physical or mental
 incapacity.
 (2) For the purposes of the removal from office of
 the President, a notice in writing,
 (a) signed by not less than one-third of all the
 members of Parliament, and
 (b) stating that the conduct or the physical or
 mental capacity of the President be investigated
 on any of the grounds specified in clause (1)
 of this article,
 shall be given to the Speaker who shall immediately inform
 the Chief Justice and deliver the notice to him.
 (3) The notice referred to in clause (2) of this article
 shall be accompanied by a statement in writing setting out
 in detail the facts, supported by the necessary documents,
 on which it is claimed that the conduct or the physical or
 mental capacity of the President be investigated for the
 purposes of his removal from office.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (5) of this
 article the Chief Justice shall, by constitutional instrument,
 forthwith convene a tribunal consisting of the Chief Justice
 as cbairman and the four most senior Justices of the
 Supreme Court which tribunal shall inquire, in camera,
 whether there is a prima facie case for the removal of the
 President.
 
 54
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) Where a notice under the provisions of clause
 (2) of this article is delivered to the Chief Justice in respect
 of the removal from offlice of the President on the grounds
 of physical or mental incapacity, the Chief Justice shall,
 in consultation with the professional Head of the Ghana
 Health Services, cause a medical board to be convened
 which shall consist of not less than four eminent medical
 specialists.
 (6) The President shall submit himself for examina-
 tion by the medical board within fourteen days of the
 appointment of the board.
 (7) The President shall be entitled during the pro-
 ceedings of the tribunal or medical board to be heard in
 his defence either by himself or by counsel or other expert
 person as the case may be, of his own choice.
 (8) The Rules of Court Committee shall, by consti-
 tutional instrument, make Rules for the practice and pro-
 cedure of the tribunal or medical board for the removal of
 the President.
 (9) Where the tribunal or medical board specified
 in clauses (4) and (5) of this article determines that there
 is a prima facle case for the removal of the President or
 that the President is by reason of physical or mental
 incapacity unable to perform the functions of his office,
 the findings shall forthwith be submitted to the Speaker of
 Parliament.
 (10) Parliament shall, within fourteen days of the
 date of the findings of the tribunal or medical board,
 move a resolution whether the President shall be removed
 from office.
 (11) The resolution for the removal from office of
 the President shall be supported, on a secret ballot, by the
 votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of
 Parliament after prior debate.
 (12) The proceedings of Parliament for the removal
 of the President shall r.ot be held in camera, except where
 Parliament otherwise orders in the interest of national
 security.
 
 55
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (13) The President shall cease to hold office as
 President on the date Parliament decides that he be removed
 from office.
 APPOMT-    57. The President shall, acting in accordance with the
 ,   "E~r. advice of the Council of State, appoint-
 (a) the Ombudsman;
 (b) the Auditor-General;
 (c) the Electoral Commissioner and the ad hoc
 Electoral Commissioners;
 (d) the chairman and the other members of,
 (i) the Public Services Commission;
 (ii) the Lands Commission;
 (iii) the Local Government Grants Commis-
 sion;
 (iv) the governing body of a public corpora-
 tion;
 (v) the Council for Higher Education.
 (e) the members of the Press Commission who
 shall appoint the chairman of the Commis-
 sion; and
 (f) the Governor and the other members of the
 governing body of the Bank of Ghana and of
 any bank, banking or financial institution
 established wholly out of public funds by or
 under an Act of Parliament.
 DBTERMINA-
 TrON OF    58. (1) The salaries and allowances payable, and the
 Smouse. facilities and privileges available, to
 (a) the Speaker, the Deputy Speakers and mem-
 bers of Parliament;
 (b) the Chief Justice and the other Justices of
 the Superior Court of Judicature;
 (c) the Auditor-General, the Electoral Commis-
 sioner and the ad hoc Electoral Commissioners,
 and the Ombudsman;
 (d) the chairman, vice-chairman and the other
 members of,
 (i) the Council for Higher Education;
 
 56
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (ii) the Public Services Commission;
 (iii) the Press Commission;
 (iv) the Lands Commission; and
 (v) the Local Government Grants Commission,
 being expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund
 shall be determined by the President on the recommenda-
 tions of a committee of not more than five persons appoin-
 ted in that behalf by the President, acting in accordance
 with the advice of the Council of State.
 (2) The salaries and allowances payable, and the
 facilities available, to the President, the Vice-President, the
 chairman and the other members of the Council of State,
 Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers, being expenditure
 charged upon the Consolidated Fund shall be determined
 by Parliament on the recommendations of the committee
 referred to in clause (1) of this article.
 (3) For the purposes of this article, and except as
 otherwise provided in this Constitution, the expression
 "salaries" includes retiring benefits or awards.
 59. (1) The President may, acting in consultation with PREROGA*
 the Council of State,                                M"C
 (a) grant to a person convicted of an offence a
 pardon either free or subject to lawful condi-
 tions; or
 (b) grant to a person a respite, either indefinite
 or for a specified period, for the execution of
 a punishment imposed on that person for an
 offence; or
 (c) substitute a less severe form of punishment
 for a punishment imposed on a person for an
 offence; or
 (d) remit the whole or part of a punishment
 imposed on a person or of a penalty or
 forfeiture otherwise due to Government on
 account of any offence.
 (2) Where a person has been sentenced to death for
 an offence a written report of the case from the trial judge
 
 57
 
 
 The Constituton
 
 together with such other information derived from the
 record of the case or elsewhere as may be necessary shall
 be submitted to the President.
 (3) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared
 that a reference in this article to a conviction or the impo-
 sition of a punishment, penalty, sentence or forfeiture
 includes a conviction or the imposition of a punishment,
 penalty, sentence or forfeiture by a court-martial or other
 military tribunals.
 SINL      60. (1) The President shall, acting in accordance with the
 ORGANMSA- advice of the Council of State, make Regulations by constitu-
 UN"     tional instrument for the registration of professional bodies.
 (2) Regulations made under clause (1) of this article
 shall provide-
 (a) for the recognition by the President of any
 such body as is registered; and
 (b) that no person shall practise as a member of a
 profession unless he has been duly registered
 in accordance with Regulations so made; and
 (c) for the right of a professional body so regis-
 tered to promulgate rules and regulations
 governing the admission, and the code of
 ethics, of its members compatible with its
 traditions.
 (3) The President shall, acting in accordance with
 the advice of a professional body recognised by him, estab-
 lish by constitutional instrument, the governing body of that
 professional body which shall regulate and supervise the
 practice of the profession concerned.
 (4) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "professional body" includes a society, an institution, or
 a group of persons, by whatever name called, the members
 of which are-
 (a) trained and qualified in a profession recognised
 as such; and
 (b) united in a common interest for the purposes
 of pursuing research and other activities con-
 cerned with the progress of knowledge in any
 such profession; and
 58
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) organised for maintaining and advancing a
 code of ethics and conduct among its members
 and generally for the maintenance of the highest
 standards compatible with the ideals and prin-
 ciples of the profession concerned.
 International Relations
 61. (1) The President shall, acting in consultation with DIPLO-mATc
 the Council of State, appoint Ambassadors, High Commis- TATIoN.
 sioners, and Ministers Plenipotentiary to represent Ghana
 abroad.
 (2) The President may receive envoys accredited to
 Ghana.
 62. (1) The President may execute or cause to be meon
 executed treaties, agreements or conventions in the name OMMES.
 of Ghana.
 (2) A treaty, agreement or convention executed by
 or under the authority of the President shall be subject to
 ratification by Parliament,
 (a) by the enactment of an Act of Parliament; or
 (b) by a resolution of Parliament supported by
 the votes of not less than one-half of all the
 members of Parliament.
 The Cabinet
 63. (1) There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of TM cABINE
 the President, the Vice-President and not less than ten nor
 more than nineteen Ministers of State.
 (2) The Cabinet shall assist the President in the
 determination of the general policy of the Government.
 (3) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet who
 shall be appointed by the President.
 64. (1) The Cabinet shall be summoned by the President  as
 who shall preside at all meetings thereof; and in the absence  ANEr.
 of the President, the Vice-President or such other Minister
 as the Vice-President may nominate shall preside.
 (2) The Cabinet shall regulate its own procedure at
 its meetings.
 59
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 bn         65. (1) Ministers of State shall be appointed by the
 OFSTE.  President with the prior approval of Parliament from
 among persons who are qualified to be elected as members
 of Parliament.
 (2) A member of Parliament appointed a Minister
 of State shall resign from Parliament before he assumes
 office.
 (3) The total number of Ministers of State including
 those in the Cabinet shall not at any time exceed thirty.
 (4) A Minister of State shall not while he continues
 in office hold any other office of profit or emolument
 whether private or public and either directly or indirectly.
 DEPUTY     66. (1) The President may, in consultation with a Minis-
 unum   ter of State, and with the prior approval of Parliament,
 appoint one or more Deputy Ministers to assist the Minister
 in the performance of his functions.
 (2) A person shall not be appointed a Deputy Minis-
 ter unless he is qualified to be elected as a member of
 Parliament.
 (3) A Deputy Minister shall not, while he continues
 in office, hold any other office of profit or emolument
 whether private or public and either directly or indirectly.
 (4) A member of Parliament appointed a Deputy
 Minister shall resign from Parliament before he assumes
 office.
 OATHS.     67. A Minister of State or a Deputy Minister shall
 not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken
 and subscribed the oath of allegiance, the oath of minis-
 ter of state and the cabinet oath, as the case may be, set
 out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 TENM OF    68. The office of a Minister of State or of a Deputy
 OFFICE OF
 unsu%,   Minister shall become vacant,
 ETC.             (a) if his appointment is revoked by the President;
 or
 (b) if he is elected as Speaker or member of Par-
 liament; or
 (c) if he resigns from office or dies.
 
 60
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 69. (1) Parliament may, by a resolution supported by the vo or
 votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of
 Parliament pass a vote of censure on a Minister of State.
 (2) A motion for the resolution referred to in clause
 (1) of this article shall not be moved in Parliament unless-
 (a) seven days' notice has been given of the motion;
 and
 (b) the notice for the motion has been signed by
 not less than one-third of all the members of
 Parliament;
 and shall be debated in Parliament within fourteen days after
 the receipt by the Speaker of the notice for the motion.
 (3) A Minister of State in respect of whom a vote of
 censure is debated pursuant to clause (2) of this article
 shall be entitled, during the debate, to be heard in his
 defence.
 The National Security Council
 70. (1) There shall be established a National Security =
 Council which shall be responsible to the President.    SECUR
 (2) The National Security Council shall consist of  .
 (a) the President and the Vice-President;
 (b) the Ministers for the time being holding the
 portfolios of foreign affairs, defence, interior,
 and finance and such other ministers as the
 President may determine; and
 (c) such other persons, not being more than five
 in number as may be appointed by the Presi-
 dent.
 (3) The President shall preside at the meetings of
 the National Security Council and in the absence of the
 President the Vice-President shall preside.
 (4) The President may, acting in consultation with
 the National Security Council, invite such persons as he
 may consider necessary for any deliberations of the Council.
 
 -6-1
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (5) The National Security Council shall regulate its
 own procedure at its meetings.
 (6) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall be the Secre-
 tary to the National Security Council.
 FUNMOM      71. The functions of the National Security Council shall
 OP 11M
 NATIONAL include the taking of measures-
 coUeCI.           (a) to ensure the collection of information relating
 to the national security and the integration of
 the domestic, foreign and military policies
 relating thereto so as to enable the military
 services and other departments and agencies
 of the Government to co-operate more effec-
 tively in matters relating to the national
 security; and
 (b) to assess and appraise the objectives, commit-
 ments and risks of Ghana in relation to the
 actual and potential military power in the
 interest of national security; and
 (c) regarding the consideration of policies on
 matters of common interest to the departments
 and agencies of the Government concerned
 -         with the national security.
 nAflLIS     72. No agency, establishment or other organisation con-
 MEWT OF
 SECUR   cerned with national security shall be established except as
 eMvICE    provided for under this Constitution.
 The National Development Commission
 NATIONAL 73. (1) There shall be established a National Develop-
 DEVEIDPMENT.
 cousmoN. ment Commission.
 (2) The Commission shall consist of-
 (a) the Vice-President, who shall be chairman;
 (b) such number of Ministers of State as the
 President may appoint;
 (c) the Government Statistician;
 (d) one representative each from each Region of
 Ghana appointed by the Regional Councils;
 
 62
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (e) such other persons as may be appointed by the
 President having regard to their knowledge
 and experience of the relevant areas of econo-
 mic or social planning.
 (3) The Commission shall advise ihe President on
 planning and developmental policy and strategy and shall
 ensure that the planning and development strategy of the
 President is effectively carried out.
 (4) The Commission shall, at the request of the Presi-
 dent or Parliament or on its own initiative, study and make-
 (a) recommendations on the contribution of agri-
 culture, industry and science and technology
 in general to the national development and
 make proposals designed to reinforce the
 essential role of agriculture in the national
 economy; and
 (b) proposals for ensuring the even development
 of the Regions of Ghana by the effective
 utilization of available resources.
 (5) The National Development Commission shall
 be responsible to the President.
 The Attorney-General
 74. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General who shall m
 be a Minister of State and the principal legal adviser to OBNEMA.
 the Government.
 (2) The Attorney-General shall discharge such other
 duties of a legal nature as may be referred or assigned to
 him by the President or imposed on him by this Constitu-
 tion or any other law.
 (3) The Attorney-General shall be responsible for
 the initiation and conduct of all prosecutions of criminal
 offences.
 (4) All offences prosecuted in the name of the Repub-
 lic of Ghana shall be at the suit of the Attorney-General
 or some other person authorised by him in accordance with
 any law.
 (5) The Attorney-General shall have audience in all
 Courts in Ghana.
 63
 6
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER NINE
 THE LEGISLATURE
 Composition of Parliament
 THE PARLIA- 75. (1) There shall be a Parliament of Ghana which shall
 GENF     consist of not less than one hundred and forty elected
 members.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
 legislative power of Ghana shall vest in the Parliament of
 Ghana and shall be exercised in accordance with the
 provisions of this Constitution.
 QAIDCA-   76. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person
 DISQUAL-  shall not be qualified to be a member of Parliament unless-
 CATIONS.
 (a) he is a citizen of Ghana and has attained the
 age of twenty-one years; and
 (b) he is resident in the constituency for which he
 stands as a candidate for election to Parliament
 or has resided, in the aggregate, for a period of
 not less than five years in that constituency or
 he hails from, or is registered to vote in that
 constituency; and
 (c) he is able to speak and, unless incapacitated by
 blindness or other physical causes, to read the
 English language with a degree of proficiency
 sufficient to enable him to take an active part
 in the proceedings of Parliament.
 (2) No person shall be qualified to be a member of
 Parliament who-
 (a) owes allegiance to a country other than Ghana;
 or
 (b) has been adjudged or otherwise declared-
 (i) a bankrupt under any law in force in
 Ghana and has not been discharged;
 (ii) to be of unsound mind or is detained
 as a criminal lunatic under any law in
 force in Ghana; or
 
 64
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) has been convicted,
 (i) for high crime under this Constitution
 or treason or for an offence involving
 the security of the State, fraud, dis-
 honesty or moral turpitude; or
 (ii) for any other offence on indictment; or
 (d) has been found by the report of a commission
 or a committee ot' inquiry to be incompetent
 to hold public office or in respect of whom a
 commission or committee of inquiry has
 found that while being a public officer ne
 acquired assets unlawfully or defrauded the
 State or misused or abused his office, or wilfully
 acted in a manner prejudicial to the interests
 of the State, and such findings have not been
 set aside on appeal or judicial review; or
 (e) has had his property confiscated as the result of
 the findings of a commission or committee of
 inquiry; and such findings have not been set
 aside on appeal or judicial review; or
 (f) is under sentence of death or other sentence of
 imprisonment imposed on him by any court; or
 (g) is not qualified to be registered as a voter
 under the provisions of the electoral law; or
 (h) is disqualified for election by a law in force
 in Ghana by reason of his holding or acting in
 an office the functions of which involve a
 responsibility for, or in connection with, the
 conduct of an election or a responsibility
 for the compilation or revision of an electoral
 register; or
 (i) is a party to, or is a partner in a firm which is
 a party to, a contract with the Government of
 Ghana for or on account of the public service,
 and has not later than one month before the day
 of the election, published in the Gazette a notice
 setting out the nature of the contract, and his
 interest or the interest therein of such firm; or
 65
 
 6A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (j) has been convicted of an offence relating to, or
 connected with, election under a law in force in
 Ghana at any time; or
 (k) is a member of the Police Service, the Prisons
 Service, the Armed Forces, the Judicial Service,
 the Civil Service, the Audit Service, the Parlia-
 mentary Service, the Statistical Service, the
 Fire Service or the Customs and Preventive
 Service; or
 (1) is otherwise disqualified by a law in force at the
 time of the coming into force of this Constitu-
 tion, not being inconsistent with a provision
 of this Constitution.
 (3) For the purposes of paragraph (c), of paragraph
 (d), of paragraph (e) and of paragraph (j) of clause (2) of
 this article, if ten years or more have elapsed since the end
 of the sentence or the date of the publication of the report
 of the commission or committee of inquiry or he has been
 pardoned, that person shall not be disqualified to be a
 member of Parliament by reason only of the provisions of
 that paragraph.
 THE sPEAX.  77. (1) There shall be a Speaker of Parliament who shall
 be elected by the members of Parliament from among
 persons who are members of Parliament or who are quali-
 fied to be elected as such.
 (2) The Speaker shall vacate his office,
 (a) if he becomes a Minister of State or a Deputy
 Minister; or
 (b) if he resigns from office by writing under his
 hand addressed to the Clerk to Parliament; or
 (c) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not
 Speaker, would disqualify him for election as
 such; or
 (d) if he is removed from office by a resolution of
 Parliament supported by the votes of not
 less than three-quarters of all the members
 thereof.
 (3) No business shall be transacted in Parliament
 other than an election to the office of Speaker at any time
 when the office of Speaker is vacant.
 
 66
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) A person elected to the office of Speaker shall,
 before entering upon the duties of his office, take and
 subscribe before Parliament the oath of allegiance and
 the Speaker's oath set out in the Second Schedule to this
 Constitution.
 (5) The Speaker shall, on assuming office, make a
 declaration of his assets and liabilities in accordance with
 article 205 of this Constitution.
 (6) The Speaker shall receive such salary and
 allowances, and on retirement, such retiring awards as
 may be determined in accordance with the provisions of
 article 58 of this Constitution.
 (7) The salary and allowances payable to the Speaker
 aud any retiring awards payable to him on retirement shall
 be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (8) The salary and other allowances payable to the
 Speaker shall not be varied to his disadvantage during the
 tenure of his office.
 78. (1) There shall be two Deputy Speakers of Parlia- DPH
 ment-
 (a) who shall be elected by the members of Parlia-
 ment from among the members of Parliament;
 and
 (b) both of whom shall not be members of the
 same political party.
 (2) The members of Parliament shall elect a person
 to the office of Deputy Speaker when Parliament first meets
 after a dissolution of Parliament and, if the office becomes
 vacant otherwise than by reason of a dissolution of Parlia-
 ment, at the first sitting of Parliament after the office
 becomes vacant.
 (3) The provisions of clause (2) of article 77 of this
 Constitution shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to a Deputy
 Speaker.
 TENUJRB OP
 79. A  member of Parliament shall vacate his seat in oFC OP
 Parliament-                                             M&MBERS.
 (a) upon a dissolution of Parliament; or
 (b) if he is elected as Speaker of Parliament; or
 (c) if he ceases to be a citizen of Ghana; or
 
 67
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (d) if he accepts appointment as a Minister of
 State or a Deputy Minister; or
 (e) if he is absent, without the permission in
 writing of the Speaker, and he is unable to
 offer a reasonable explanation to the Pri-
 vileges Committee, from fifteen sittings of a
 meeting of Parliament during any period that
 Parliament has been summoned to meet and
 continues to meet; or
 (f) if he is expelled from Parliament after having
 been found guilty of contempt of Parliament
 by a committee of Parliament; or
 (g) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not
 a member of Parliament, would cause him to
 be disqualified for election, under the pro-
 visions of article 76 of this Constitution; or
 (h) if he resigns from office as a member of
 Parliament by writing under his hand addressed
 to the Speaker; or
 (i) if he leaves the party of which he was a member
 at the time of his election to Parliament to
 join another party.
 EMOLUMENTS  80. (1) A member of Parliament shall be paid such
 MBERS.   salary and allowances and provided with such facilities as
 may be determined in accordance with the provisions of
 article 58 of this Constitution.
 (2) A member of Parliament shall not hold any
 office of profit or emolument, whether private or public
 and either directly or indirectly, unless otherwise permitted
 by the Speaker acting on the recommendations of a com-
 mittee of Parliament on the ground-
 (a) that holding any such office will not be to
 the prejudice of the work of a member of
 Parliament; and
 (b) that no conflict of interest arises or would
 arise as a result of the member holding such
 office.
 
 68
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 81. (1) The High Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction DETERMNA
 . TION OP
 to hear and determine any question whether,             QUEmON
 (a) a person has been validly elected as a member E TOERSP.
 of Parliament or the seat of a member has
 become vacant; or
 (b) a person has been validly elected as a Speaker
 of Parliament or, having been so elected, has
 vacated the office of Speaker.
 (2) The Rules of Court Committee shall, by consti-
 tutional instrument, make Rules of Court for the practice
 and procedure of the High Court of Justice with respect to
 the jurisdiction conferred upon the High Court of Justice
 by the provisions of clause (1) of this article.
 (3) A person aggrieved by the determination of the
 High Court of Justice under this article may appeal in
 accordance with the Rules made under clause (2) of this
 article.
 Procedure in Parliament
 82. (1) A member of Parliament shall, before taking his OATH OF
 seat therein, take and subscribe before the Speaker and in MEMBERS.
 the presence of the members of Parliament, the oath of
 allegiance and the oath of a member of Parliament set out
 in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 (2) A member may, before taking the oaths referred
 to in clause (1) of this article take part in the election of the
 Speaker.
 83. There shall preside at any sitting of Parliament-  ESIDINO
 (a) the Speaker; or                             PARLIAMENT.
 (b) in the absence of the Speaker, a Deputy Speaker.
 84. Where objection is taken by a member of Parliament QUORUM IN
 present that there are present in Parliament, besides the PARLIET.
 person presiding, less than one-third of all the members of
 Parliament, and after such interval as may be prescribed in
 the rules of procedure of Parliament, the person presiding
 ascertains that the number of members present is still less
 than one-third of the number of all the members of Parlia-
 ment, he shall thereupon adjourn Parliament.
 
 69
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 COaUinU    85. (1) At the first meeting of Parliament there shall be
 numNr. appointed, after the election of the Speaker, and the Deputy
 Speakers-
 (a) the Public Accounts Committee;
 (b) the Business Committee;
 (c) the Standing Orders Committee;
 (d) the Committee of Privileges;
 (e) the Subsidiary Legislation Committee;
 (f) the Finance Committee;
 (g) the Foreign Affairs Committee; and
 (h) such other committees of Parliament as the
 rules of procedure of Parliament shall provide.
 (2) In addition to the committees referred to in
 clause (1) of this article, Parliament shall appoint other
 committees which shall perform the functions specified in
 clause (3) of this article.
 (3) It shall be the duty of any such committee as is
 referred to in clause (2) of this article to investigate and
 inquire into the activities and administration of such minis-
 tries or departments as may be assigned to it and such
 investigation and inquiry may extend to proposals for
 legislation.
 (4) Notwithstanding. anything contained in clauses
 (1) and (2) of this article, Parliament may at any time
 appoint any other committee to investigate any matter of
 public importance.
 (5) Every member of Parliament shall be appointed
 to at least one of the committees appointed under clause (1)
 of this article.
 (6) The composition of each of the committees
 appointed under clauses (1), (2) and (4) of this article shall,
 as much as possible, reflect the different shades of opinion
 in Parliament.
 (7) For the purposes of effectively performing its
 functions each of the committees shall have all such powers,
 
 70
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 rights and privileges as are vested in the High Court of
 Justice or a Justice thereof at a trial in respect of-
 (a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and
 examining them on oath, affirmation or other-
 wise;
 (b) compelling production of documents; and
 (c) the issue of a commission or request to
 examine witnesses abroad.
 86. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, vOwne IN
 no question for decision in Parliament shall be proposed ARUAMENT.
 for determination unless there are present in Parliament
 not less than one-half of all the members of Parliament,
 and except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the
 question proposed shall be determined by the majority of
 the votes of the members so present and voting.
 (2) The Speaker shall have neither an original nor
 a casting vote and where upon any question before Parlia-
 ment the votes are equally divided the motion shall be lost.
 (3) There shall be secret voting in Parliament in
 respect of-
 (a) a bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any
 provision of this Constitution; or
 (b) the election or removal of a person holding
 office under this Constitution or a law made
 under this Constitution.
 (4) A member who is a party to, or is a partner in
 a firm which is a party to a contract with the Government
 shall, in any proceedings in Parliament relating to that
 contract, declare his interest or the interest therein of that
 firm and shall not vote on any question relating to that
 contract.
 87. A person who sits or votes in Parliament knowing uNQuALU'M
 or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not  RON OR
 entitled so to do commits an offence and shall be liable voTMG.
 on conviction to such penalty as shall be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament.
 88. (1) The power of Parliament to make laws shall be MODE OP
 exercised by bills passed by Parliament and assented to  sIAgm
 by the President.
 
 71
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) No bill, other than such a bill as is referred to in
 paragraph (a) of article 90 of this Constitution, shall be
 introduced in Parliament unless-
 (a) it is accompanied by an explanatory memoran-
 dum setting out in detail the policy and
 principles of the bill, the defects of the existing
 law, the remedies proposed to deal with
 those defects and the necessity for its intro-
 duction; and
 (b) it has been published in the Gazette fourteen
 days before the date of its introduction in
 Parliament.
 (3) No bill affecting the institution of chieftaincy
 shall be introduced in Parliament without prior reference
 to the National House of Chiefs.
 (4) Whenever a bill is read the first time in Parlia-
 ment, it shall be referred to the appropriate committee
 appointed under article 85 of this Constitution which shall
 examine the bill in detail and make all such inquiries in
 relation thereto as the committee considers expedient or
 necessary.
 (5) Where a bill has been deliberated upon by the
 appropriate committee it shall then be reported to Parlia-
 ment; and the report of the committee together with
 the explanatory memorandum to the bill shall form the
 basis for a full debate on the bill for its passage, with or
 without amendments, or its rejection, by Parliament.
 (6) Where a bill passed by Parliament is presented to
 the President for assent he shall signify, within seven days
 thereof, to the Speaker that he assents to the bill or that
 he refuses to assent to the bill unless the Council of State
 indicates that it is considering the bill.
 (7) Where the President refuses to assent to a bill
 he shall, within fourteen days of the refusal-
 (a) state in a memorandum to the Speaker any
 specific provisions of the bill which in his
 opinion should be reconsidered by Parliament
 including his recommendations for amend-
 ments; or
 
 72
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) inform the Speaker that he has referred the
 bill to the Council of State for consideration
 and comments or that the Council of State is
 considering the bill in accordance with the
 provisions of article 107 of this Constitution.
 (8) Parliament shall reconsider a bill taking into
 account the comments made by the President or the Council
 of State, as the case may be, under clause (7) of this
 article.
 (9) Where a bill reconsidered under clause (8) of this
 article is passed by Parliament by a resolution in that behalf
 supported by the votes of not less than one half of all the
 members of Parliament, the President shall assent thereto
 within thirty days of the passing of the resolution.
 (10) Without prejudice to the power of Parliament
 to postpone the operation of a law, a bill shall not
 become law until it has been duly passed and assented to
 in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and
 shall not come into force unless it has been published in
 the Gazette.
 (11) The provisions of clauses (6) to (9) inclusive of
 this article shall not apply to a bill certified by the Speaker
 as a bill to which the provisions of article 90 of this Consti-
 tution apply; and accordingly the President shall give his
 assent to any such bill when presented for assent.
 (12) Where it is determined by a committee of
 Parliament appointed in that behalf that a particular bill
 is of an urgent nature, the provisions of the preceding
 clauses of this article, other than clause (1) and paragraph
 (a) of clause (2) shall not apply, and accordingly the
 President shall give his assent thereto on its presentation
 for assent.
 (13) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (12) of
 this article the Council of State shall consider all bills passed
 under a certificate of urgency.
 (14) No bill introduced into Parliament by or on
 behalf of the President shall be delayed for more than three
 months in any committee of Parliament.
 
 73
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 REGISACIW  89. (1) Parliament shall have no power to enact a law-
 (a) which has the effect of a legislative judgement;
 or
 (b) which is to operate retrospectively either in
 intent or content.
 (2) The provisions of paragraph (b) of clause (1) of
 this article shall not affect a law enacted pursuant to
 articles 140 to 145 of this Constitution.
 SFWrNN      90. Parliament shall not, unless the bill is introduced or
 MI  IAL the motion is introduced by, or on behalf of, the President-
 (a) proceed upon a bill including an amendment to
 a bill, that, in the opinion of the person pre-
 siding, makes provision for any of the follow-
 ing, that is to say,
 (i) the imposition of taxation or the altera-
 tion of taxation otherwise than by
 reduction; or
 (ii) the imposition of a charge upon the
 Consolidated Fund or other public
 funds of Ghana or the alteration of
 any such charge otherwise than by re-
 duction; or
 (iii) the payment, issue or withdrawal from
 the Consolidated Fund or other public
 funds of Ghana of any moneys not
 charged upon the Consolidated Fund
 or any increase in the amount of such
 payment, issue or withdrawal; or
 (iv) the composition or remission of any debt
 due to the Government of Ghana; or
 (b) proceed upon a motion, including an amend-
 ment to a motion, the effect of which, in the
 opinion of the person presiding, would be to
 make provision for any of the purposes specified
 in paragraph (a) of this article.
 STANDING 91. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 ORDERS OF P.
 p-ARUAlgNT. Parliament may regulate its own procedure.
 
 74
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) Parliament may act notwithstanding a vacancy in
 its membership, including a vacancy not filled when Parlia-
 ment first meets after a dissolution of Parliament, and the
 presence or participation of a person not entitled to be
 present or to participate in the proceedings of Parliament
 shall not invalidate those proceedings.
 92. Subject to the provisions of article 87 of this Constitu- ATTBNANCE
 tion, a Minister of State may, with the permission of the BY A
 INISTER O
 Speaker and at the request of the President, or the Speaker, STATE, ETC.
 ortwentyormore members of Parliament, take part without
 a vote in the deliberations of Parliament or a committee
 thereof in order-
 (a) to give an account of any matter falling within
 his portfolio; or
 (b) to explain any aspect of Government policy; or
 (c) to introduce a bill.
 Summoning, Dissolution, etc.
 93. (1) A session of Parliament shall be held at such place  L  o0r.
 within Ghana and shall commence at such time as the
 Speaker may, by constitutional instrument, appoint.
 (2) There shall be a session of Parliament at least once
 in every year, so however, that a period of twelve months
 shall not intervene between the last sitting of Parliament in
 one session and the first sitting thereof in the next session.
 (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
 article, any twenty members of Parliament may request a
 meeting of Parliament and the Speaker shall, within seven
 days after the receipt of that request, summon Parliament.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) of article
 94 of this Constitution, a general election of members of
 Parliament shall be held within the thirty days before the
 expiration of the period specified in clause (1) of article 94
 of this Constitution; and a session of Parliament shall be
 appointed to commence within fourteen days after such
 expiration.
 (5) Whenever a vacancy occurs in Parliament, the
 Clerk to Parliament shall notify the Electoral Commissioner
 
 75
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 in writing within seven days after the vacancy occurred
 and a by-election shall be held within thirty days after the
 vacancy occurred.
 (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (5) of
 this article, a by-election shall not be held within three
 months before the holding of a general election.
 94. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) of this
 article, Parliament shall continue for five years from the
 date of its first sitting and shall then stand dissolved.
 (2) At any time when Ghana is actually engaged in
 war Parliament may, from time to time by resolution passed
 in that behalf and supported by the votes of not less than
 two-thirds of all the members of Parliament, extend the
 period of five years specified in clause (1) of this article for
 not more than twelve months at a time, so however, that the
 life of Parliament shall not be extended under this clause for
 more than five years.
 . (3) Where, after a dissolution of Parliament and
 before the holding of a general election, the President is
 satisfied that owing to the existence of a state of war or of a
 state of public emergency in Ghana or any part thereof it is
 necessary to recall Parliament, the President shall cause to
 be summoned the Parliament that has been dissolved to
 meet, and unless the life of Parliament is extended under
 the provisions of clause (2) of this article, the general elec-
 tion of members of Parliament shall proceed and the
 Parliament that has been recalled shall, if not sooner
 dissolved, again stand dissolved on the date appointed for
 the nomination of candidates for the general election.
 95. (1) A person who has served as a member of
 Parliament for a period of not less than five years shall be
 eligible, on ceasing to be a member or on his death, for the
 payment of such gratuity to him or his personal represen-
 tatives, as the case may be, as shall be determined by the
 President, acting in consultation with the Council of State.
 (2) For thepurposes of clause (1) of this article the
 period of five years specified therein shall be interpreted to
 mean five continuous years, and accordingly any period
 when the member is out of office, otherwise than by dissolu-
 tion of Parliament as such, shall not be taken into account.
 
 76
 
 DISSOLUTION.
 GRATUITY
 FOR MEMBERS
 PARLLAMENT.
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 Privileges and Immunities
 96. There shall be freedom of speech, debate and proceedings in Parliament and that freedom shall not be impeached or questioned in any Court or place out of Parliament.
 97. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, but with-out prejudice to the generality of the provisions of article  of this Constitution, no civil or criminal proceedings shall be instituted against a member of Parliament in any Court or place out of Parliament for any matter or thing brought by him in or before Parliament by petition, bill, motion or otherwise.
 (2) Whenever in the opinion of the person presiding in
 Parliament a statement made by a member is prima facie
 defamatory of any person, the person presiding shall refer
 the matter for inquiry to the Committee of Privileges which
 shall report its findings to Parliament not later than thirty
 days of the matter being so referred.
 (3) Where the Committee of Privileges reports to
 Parliament that the statement made by the member is
 defamatory of any person, the member who made the
 statement shall, within seven days after that report, render
 an apology at the bar of Parliament, the terms of which shall
 be approved by the Committee of Privileges and communi-
 cated to the person who has been defamed.
 (4) Where a member refuses to render an apology in
 accordance with the provisions of clause (3) of this article,
 the Speaker shall suspend that member for the duration of
 the session of Parliament in which the defamatory statement
 was made and a member so suspended shall lose his parlia-
 mentary privileges, immunities and remuneration which
 shall be restored to him if at any time before the end of
 the session he renders the apology as required by clause (3)
 of this article.
 (5) A person who has made a contemporaneous
 report of the proceedings in Parliament, including a state-
 ment which has been the subject of an inquiry under clause
 (2) of this article, shall publish the apology referred to in
 clause (3) of this article or the suspension or the apology
 referred to in clause (4) of this article with the same
 
 77
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 prominence as he published the first report; and where any
 such person fails to publish that apology he shall not be
 protected by privilege.
 98. No civil or criminal process coming from any Court
 Or place out of Parliament shall be served on, or executed
 in relation to, the Speaker or a member or the Clerk to
 Parliament while he is on his way to, attending at or
 returning from, any proceedings of Parliament.
 99. (1) Neither the Speaker nor a member of, nor the
 Clerk to, Parliament shall be compelled, while attending
 Parliament to appear as a witness in any Court or place
 out of Parliament.
 (2) The certificate of the Speaker that a member or
 the Clerk is attending the proceedings of Parliament shall
 be conclusive evidence of attendance at Parliament.
 100. Neither the Speaker nor a member of, nor the Clerk
 to, Parliament shall be required to serve on a jury in any
 Court or place out of Parliament.
 101. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no
 PUBLICATION person shall be under any civil or criminal liability in
 OF       respect of the publication of-
 PROCBEDINGS.
 (a) the text or a summary of any report, papers,
 minutes, votes or proceedings of Parliament,
 or
 (b) a contemporaneous report of the proceedings
 of Parliament,
 unless it is shown that the publication was effected
 maliciously or otherwise in want of good faith.
 PRIVIHEGES  102. (1) A person summoned to attend to give evidence
 OTMESSES.  or to produce a paper, book, record or other document
 before Parliament shall be entitled, in respect of his evidence,
 or the production of the document, as the case may be, to
 the same privileges as if he were appearing before a Court.
 (2) No public officer shall be required to produce
 before Parliament a document where-
 (a) the Speaker certifies-
 (i) that the document belongs to a class
 
 78
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 of documents which it is injurious to
 the public interest to produce; or
 (ii) that disclosure of the contents thereof
 will be injurious to the public interest;
 or
 (b) the National Security Council certifies-
 (i) that the document belongs to a class
 of documents which it is prejudicial
 to the security of the State to produce;
 or
 (ii) that disclosure of the contents thereof
 will be prejudicial to the security of
 the State.
 (3) Where there is a doubt as to whether a docu-
 ment referred to in clause (2) of this article is injurious
 to the public interest or prejudicial to the security of the
 State, the Speaker or the National Security Council, as the
 case may be, shall refer the matter to the Supreme Court
 for determination by the Supreme Court whether the
 production or the disclosure of the contents of any such
 document would be injurious to the public interest or
 prejudicial to the security of the State.
 (4) An answer by a person to a question put by
 Parliament shall not be admissible in evidence against him
 in any civil or criminal proceedings out of Parliament, not
 being proceedings for perjury brought under the criminal
 law.
 Contempt of Parliament
 103. An act or omission which obstructs or impedes OENERAL
 Parliament in the performance of its functions or which coNM.
 obstructs or impedes a member or officer thereof in the
 discharge of his duties or affronts the dignity of Parliament
 or which tends either directly or indirectly to produce such
 a result shall be contempt of Parliament.
 104. Where an act or omission which constitutes con- CRwINAL
 tempt of Parliament is an offence under the criminal law, PROCEEDINGS.
 the exercise by Parliament of the power to punish for
 contempt shall not be a bar to the institution of proceed-
 ings under the criminal law.
 79
 7
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 The Parliamentary Service
 THE PARLIA-  105 (1) There shall be a Parliamentary Service which
 MENTARY
 SERVICE.  shall form part of the public services of Ghana.
 (2) There shall be a Parliamentary Service Board
 which shall consist of-
 (a) the Speaker, as chairman; and
 (b) four other members all of whom shall be
 appointed by the Speaker, acting in accordance
 with the advice of a committee of Parliament;
 and .
 (c) the Clerk to Parliament, who shall be an ex
 officio member of the Board.
 (3) There shall be a Clerk to Parliament who shall be
 the head of the Parliamentary Service.
 (4) The appointment of the Clerk and the other
 members of his staff in the Parliamentary Service shall be
 made by the Parliamentary Service Board in consultation
 with the Public Services Commission. .
 (5) The Parliamentary Service Board shall with the
 prior approval of Parliament make Regulations, by consti-
 tutional instrument, prescribing the terms and conditions of
 service of the officers and other employees in the Parlia-
 mentary Service and generally for the effective and efficient
 administration of the Parliamentary Service.
 
 80
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TEN
 THE COUNCIL OF STATE
 106. (1) There shall be a Council of State to aid and  E COUNCIL
 counsel the President and Parliament in the performance OP STATE.
 of their respective functions.
 (2) The Council of State shall consist of-
 (a) any person who has held the office of Presi-
 dent or Head of State and did not leave office
 in disreputable or other circumstances imput-
 ing moral turpitude, able and willing to act
 as a member of the Council of State;
 (b) not more than five persons each of whom
 has held the office of Chief Justice, or
 Speaker of Parliament, or Chief of Defence
 Staff, or Inspector-General of Police, or
 Governor of the Bank of Ghana, or Vice-
 Chancellor of a recognised University or
 Secretary to the Cabinet or Head of the
 Civil Service, who did not leave office in
 disreputable or other circumstances imputing
 moral turpitude, able and willing to act as
 a member of the Council of State, appointed
 by the President with the prior approval of
 Parliament;
 (c) not more than eight persons appointed by
 the President from recognised professional
 bodies with the prior approval of Parliament;
 (d) the President of the National House of
 Chiefs; and
 (e) not more than twelve persons each of whom
 is a citizen of Ghana of proven eminence
 and merit, one each of whom shall, at least,
 be resident in each Region of Ghana,
 appointed by the President with the prior
 approval of Parliament.
 (3) The Council of State shall elect a chairman,
 from among its members.
 (4) A member of the Council of State shall, at the
 first meeting thereof which he attends as a member, take
 81
 7A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 and subscribe the oath of secrecy and the oath of a coun-
 cillor of state set out in the Second Schedule to this Con-
 stitution.
 (5) A member of the Council of State appointed by
 the President, unless he previously resigns by writing under
 his hand and addressed to the President, becomes perma-
 nently incapacitated, is removed from office or dies, shall
 hold office until another person is elected as President and
 assumes office as such.
 (6) The appointment of a member of the Council of
 State may be terminated by the President on any ground of
 stated misbehaviour and with the prior approval of Parlia-
 ment.
 (7) The chairman and members of the Council of
 State shall receive such allowances as may be determined
 in accordance with the provisions of article 58 of this
 Constitution.
 (8) The allowances and privileges of the chairman
 and of the other members of the Council of State shall be
 a charge upon the Consolidated Fund and shall not be
 varied to he disadvantage of any such member while he
 holds office.
 CONSIDERA-  107. (1) A bill which has been published in the Gazette
 S BY THE or passed by Parliament shall be considered by the Council
 CUNCIL OF of State-
 STATE.           (a) if the President so requests; or
 (b) if the chairman of the Council of State so
 determines; or
 (c) if not less than five members of the Council
 of State so demand; or
 (d) if the bill was passed under a certificate of
 urgency.
 (2) A request from the President for consideration
 of a bill may be accompanied by a statement setting forth
 the amendments or changes which the President proposes
 for consideration by the Council of State.
 (3) Consideration of a bill under clause (1) of this
 article shall be completed within thirty days after the third
 reading in Parliament of that bill, except that where the
 bill was passed under a certificate of urgency the Council
 
 82
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 of State shall consider it and report to the President and
 Parliament within seventy-two hours.
 (4) The chairman of the Council of State shall forth-
 with inform the President and the Speaker of Parliament
 whenever there is a request for consideration of a bill in
 accordance with the provisions of this article.
 (5) Where the Council of State decides not to pro-
 pose an amendment to a bill the chairman shall, within
 seven days of the decision of the Council, transmit the bill
 with a certificate to that effect addressed to the President
 and the Speaker of Parliament.
 (6) Where the Council of State decides to propose
 amendments to a bill, the bill, with a memorandum setting
 forth the amendments proposed on the bill shall be trans-
 mitted by the chairman to the President and the Speaker
 of Parliament within fifteen days of the conclusion of the
 consideration by the Council of State.
 108. (1) The Council of State shall consider and advise OTHER
 the President or any other authority in respect of any "u      O
 appointment which is required by this Constitution or OF STATE.
 any other law relating to the same to be made in accordance
 with the advice of, or in consultation with, the Council of
 State which advice shall be given not later than thirty days
 after the receipt of the request from the President or other
 authority.
 (2) The Council of State may, upon request or at
 its own initiative consider and make recommendations on
 any matter being considered or dealt with by the President,
 a Minister of State, Parliament or any other authority
 established by this Constitution, so however, that the
 President, Minister of State, Parliament or other authority
 shall not be required to act in accordance with any recom-
 mendations made by the Council of State pursuant to this
 clause.
 (3) The Council of State shall perform such other
 functions as may be assigned to it by this Constitution or
 any other law in accordance with this Constitution.
 109. (1) The Council of State shall meet whenever it is PROCEDUR
 requested to meet by the President or by its chairman or " "THE
 STATE.
 83
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 by at least five members, so however, that the Council
 shall meet at least four times in each year.
 (2) The Council of State shall hold its meetings in
 camera but may admit the public to any meetings whenever
 it thinks it appropriate.
 (3) There shall preside at any sitting of the Council
 of State-
 (a) the chairman; or
 (b) in the absence of the chairman such member
 of the Council of State as the Council shall
 elect for that purpose.
 (4) No question for decision in the Council of
 State shall be proposed for determination unless there
 are present in the Council not less than one-half of all
 the members of the Council, and except as otherwise pro-
 vided in this Constitution, the question proposed shall be
 determined by the majority of the members present and
 voting.
 (5) The Council of State may at any time appoin
 such committees as it thinks appropriate and assign to such
 committees any matter or investigation which the Council
 may determine.
 (6) The Council of State may commission experts
 and consultants to advise it or to assist it in dealing with
 specific issues upon such terms and conditions as the
 Council may determine.
 (7) A member who is a party to, or is a partner in a
 firm which is a party to, a contract with the Government
 shall, in any proceedings in the Council of State relating
 to that contract, declare his interest or the interest therein
 of that firm and shall not vote on any question relating
 to that contract.
 (8) The Council of State may act notwithstanding
 a vacancy in its membership, including a vacancy not
 filled when the Council first meets after a dissolution of
 the Council, and the presence or participation of a person
 not entitled to be present or to participate in the proceed-
 ings of the Council shall not invalidate those proceedings.
 (9) Subject to the -provisions of this' Constitution
 the Council of State may regulate its own procedure.
 
 84
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER ELEVEN
 THE OMBUDSMAN
 110. There shall be an Ombudsman who shall be ESTAuSH-
 appointed by the President, acting in consultation with the OMUM.
 Council of State, and with the approval of Parliament.
 111. (1) The Ombudsman may investigate any action FuNcnO4sOP
 taken or omitted to be taken by or on behalf of-
 (a) a department or ministry of State,
 (b) a public corporation,
 (c) a member of the Armed Forces or the Police
 Service, or the Prisons Service; and
 (d) a member of the public services,
 being an action taken or omitted to be taken in the exercise
 of the administrative functions of that department, minis-
 try, corporation, authority or person.
 (2) The Ombudsman shall not investigate-
 (a) a matter which is sub judice before a Court or
 judicial tribunal; or
 (b) a matter involving the relations or dealings
 between the Government of Ghana and any
 other Government or an international organi-
 sation; or
 (c) a matter relating to the exercise of the preroga-
 tive of mercy.
 112. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, LEOISLAnON
 Parliament shall, within six months after the coming into  *"U
 force of this Constitution, by or under an Act of Parliament,
 (a) specify the other matters which shall be subject
 to investigation by the Ombudsman; and
 (b) provide for the establishment of regional and
 district offices of the Ombudsman; and
 
 85
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) set out the procedure for the lodging of com-
 plaints and the procedure in respect of investi-
 gations; and
 (d) specify the powers of the Ombudsman in
 respect of,
 (i) the furnishing of information and
 the production of documents to the
 Ombudsman;
 (ii) the attendance and the examination of
 witnesses; and
 (iii) the making of recommendations in
 respect of appropriate remedies;
 and generally for the purposes of enabling the Ombuds-
 man to perform the functions conferred upon him by this
 Constitution or any other law.
 (2) The Ombudsman shall, in each session of
 Parliament, submit a report to Parliament which shall
 contain a summary of the matters investigated, and the
 action taken thereon by him during the preceding session of
 Parliament.
 QUALIFICA-  113. (1) A person shall not be qualified-
 TIONS OF THE
 OMBUDSMAN.        (a) for appointment as Ombudsman unless he is
 qualified to practise as counsel in accordance
 with the provisions of clause (3) of article 127
 of this Constitution and has been so qualified
 for a period of not less than twelve years; or
 (b) to hold office as the Ombudsman while he still
 holds any other public office or is a member
 of Parliament or has attained the age of sixty-
 five years.
 (2) The Ombudsman when appointed shall enjoy
 the terms and conditions of service, other than such terms
 and conditions as relate to retiring awards, of a Justice of
 the Court of Appeal.
 (3) Whenever the Ombudsman dies, resigns or is
 removed from office or is absent from Ghana or is for any
 other reason unable to perform the functions of his office,
 the President shall, acting in accordance with the advice of
 
 86
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 the Council of State, appoint a person qualified to be
 appointed Ombudsman to perform those functions until
 the resumption of office of the Ombudsman, or until the
 appointment of a new Ombudsman.
 (4) In the performance of any of his functions the
 Ombudsman shall be subject only to this Constitution and
 shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other
 person or authority.
 (5) The appointment of officers and other employees
 of the staff of the Ombudsman shall be made by the
 Ombudsman acting in consultation with the Public Services
 Commission.
 (6) The administrative expenses of the Ombuds-
 man, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable
 to, or in respect of, persons serving with the Ombudsman
 shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (7) The procedure for the removal of the Ombuds-
 man shall be the same as that provided for the removal of
 Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature under the
 provisions of article 128 of this Constitution.
 (8) For the purposes of performing his functions
 under this Constitution and any other law the Ombudsman
 may bring actions before any Court in Ghana and to seek
 any and all remedies which may be available from such
 Court.
 (9) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
 and to an Act enacted by Parliament pursuant to the pro-
 visions of article 112 of this Constitution, the Ombudsman
 shall make, by constitutional instrument, Regulations regard-
 ing the manner and procedure for bringing complaints
 betore him and the investigation thereof.
 
 87
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWELVE
 THE JUDICIARY
 The Superior Court of Judicature
 TM RWXn 3AL 114. (1) The judicial power of Ghana shall be vested in
 GHANA.   the Judiciary of which the Chief Justice shall be the Head;
 and accordingly no organ or agency of the executive or
 the legislature shall be given any final judicial power.
 (2) The Judiciary shall have jurisdiction in all
 matters civil and criminal including matters relating to this
 Constitution, and such other matters in respect of which
 Parliament may, by or under an Act of Parliament, confer
 jurisdiction on the Judiciary.
 (3) In the exercise of the judicial power of Ghana
 the Judiciary in both its judicial and administrative functions
 including financial administration, shall be subject only to
 this Constitution and shall not be subject to the control or
 direction of any other person or authority.
 (4) The administrative expenses of the Judiciary
 including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to,
 or in respect of, persons serving in the Judiciary shall be a
 charge upon the Consolidated Fund. .
 (5) The Judiciary shall consist of the Supreme Court
 of Ghana, the Court of Appeal and the High Court of
 Justice which shall be the superior courts of record and
 which shall constitute one Superior Court of Judicature,
 and such other inferior Courts and traditional Courts as
 Parliament may by law establish.
 (6) The Superior Court of Judicature shall have
 the power to commit for contempt to themselves and all
 such powers as were vested in a court of record imme-
 diately before the coming into force of this Constitution.
 (7) Except as otherwise provided in clause (14) of
 article 26 of this Constitution, or as may otherwise be
 ordered by a Court in the interests of public morality,
 public safety or public order the proceedings of every
 Court, including the announcement of the decision of the
 Court shall be held in public.
 
 88
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (8) In the exercise of the judicial power conferred
 upon the Judiciary by this Constitution or any other law,
 the Superior Court of Judicature may, in relation to any
 matter within its jurisdiction, issue such orders as may be
 necessary to ensure the enforcement of any judgment,
 decree or order of the Court.
 (9) A Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature
 shall not be liable to any action or suit for any matter or
 thing done by him in the performance of his function as
 such Justice.
 (10) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article,
 the expression " financial administration " means the
 management, including the operation of banking facilities,
 by the Judiciary without the interference of any person or
 authority, other than for the purposes of audit by the
 Auditor-General, of the funds voted by Parliament or
 charged upon the Consolidated Fund by this Constitution
 or any other law for the purposes of defraying the expenses
 of the Judiciary in respect of which the funds were voted or
 so charged.
 The Supreme Court
 115. (1) The Supreme Court shall consist of           COMPOSmON
 OF THE
 (a) the Chief Justice, who shall be the president o
 thereof; and                                COURT.
 (b) not less than six other Justices of the Supreme
 Court.
 (2) The Supreme Court shall, except as otherwise
 provided in article 120 of this Constitution, be duly con-
 stituted for the despatch of its business by not less than
 five Justices thereof.
 (3) The Chief Justice shall preside at the sittings
 of the Supreme Court and in his absence the most senior
 of the Justices of the Supreme Court as constituted for the
 time being shall preside.
 116. (1) The Supreme Court shall be the final court of GmRM,
 appeal in and for Ghana and shall have such appellate and -uReDICON
 other jurisdiction as may be conferred upon it by this SUPREM
 Constitution or any other law.                          COURT.
 
 89
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2). The Supreme Court shall not be bound to
 follow the decisions of any other Court.
 (3) The Supreme Court may, while treating its own
 previous decisions as normally binding, depart from a
 previous decision when it appears right so to do; and all
 other Courts shall be bound to follow the decisions of the
 Supreme Court on questions of law.
 (4) For the purposes of hearing and determining a
 matter within its jurisdiction and the amendment, execution
 or the enforcement of a judgment or order made on any
 such matter, and for the purposes of any other authority,
 expressly or by necessary implication given to the Supreme
 Court by this Constitution or any other law, the Supreme
 Court shall have all the powers, authority and jurisdiction
 vested in any Court established by this Constitution or any
 other law.
 APPELLATE   117. (1) An appeal shall lie from a judgment, decree or
 JURISDICTION
 OF THE    order of the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court,
 SUPREME
 COUR.            (a) as of right, in a civil cause or matter;
 (b) as of right, in a criminal cause or matter in
 respect of which an appeal has been brought to
 the Court of Appeal from a judgment, decree
 or order of the High Court of Justice in the
 exercise of its original jurisdiction;
 (c) with the leave of the Court of Appeal, in any
 other criminal cause or matter, where the
 Court of Appeal is satisfied that the case
 involves a substantial question of law or is of
 public importance.
 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (1) of
 this article, the Supreme Court may entertain an applica-
 tion for special leave to appeal in any cause or matter, civil
 or criminal, to the Supreme Court, and may grant such
 leave accordingly.
 (3) The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdic-
 tion to hear and determine any matter which has been
 determined by the national chieftaincy tribunal.
 
 90
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdic-
 tion, to the exclusion of the Court of Appeal, to hear and
 determine any matter relating to the conviction of any
 person for treason by the High Court of Justice.
 118. (1) The Supreme Court shall, except as otherwise ORIGINAL
 provided in article 35 of this Constitution, have original 'OWION
 jurisdiction, to the exclusion of all other Courts,      SUPREM
 (a) in all matters relating to the enforcement or
 interpretation of any provision of this Consti-
 tution; and
 (b) where a question arises whether an enactment
 was made in excess of the powers conferred
 upon Parliament or any other authority or
 person by law or under this Constitution.
 (2) Where a question relating to a matter or question
 as is referred to in clause (1) of this article arises in any
 proceedings in any Court, other than the Supreme Court,
 that Court shall stay the proceedings and refer the question
 of law involved to the Supreme Court for determination;
 and the Court in which the question arose shall dispose of
 the case in accordance with the decision of the Supreme
 Court.
 119. The Supreme Court shall have supervisory jurisdic- SUPERVIRY
 * * JURISDICTON
 tion over all other Courts in Ghana and over any adjudicat- OF THE
 ing authority; and in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdic- SUPRM
 tion shall have power to issue such directions, orders or ocR.
 writs including writs or orders in the nature of habeas corpus,
 certiorari, mandamus, prohibition, and quo warranto as it
 may consider appropriate for the purposes of enforcing or
 securing the enforcement of its supervisory powers.
 120. A single Justice of the Supreme Court may exercise POwERS OF A
 a power vested in the Supreme Court not involving the J"cis OF
 decision of the cause or matter before the Supreme Court, THE SUPREME
 except that,                                             COURT.
 (a) in criminal matters, where that Justice refuses
 or grants an application in the exercise of any
 such power, a person affected thereby shall
 be entitled to have the application determined
 by the Supreme Court constituted by three
 Justices thereof; and
 
 91
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) in civil matters, any order, direction or decision
 made or given in pursuance of the powers
 conferred by this article may be varied, dis-
 charged or reversed by the Supreme Court,
 constituted by three Justices thereof.
 The Court of Appeal
 COMPOSmON   121. (1) The Court of Appeal shall consist of-
 OF THE
 COURT OF          (a) the Chief Justice;
 (b) not less than five Justices of the Court of
 Appeal; and
 (c) such other Justices of the Superior Court of
 Judicature as the Chief Justice may, for the
 determination of a particular cause or matter
 by writing under his hand, request to sit in the
 Court of Appeal for such period as the Chief
 Justice may specify or until the request is
 withdrawn.
 (2) The Court of Appeal shall be duly constituted by
 any three Justices thereof and when so constituted the most
 senior of the Justices shall preside.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of clause (3) of article 116
 of this Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall be bound
 by its own previous decisions and all Courts inferior to
 the Court of Appeal shall be bound to follow the decisions
 of the Court of Appeal on questions of law.
 (4) The Chief Justice may create such Divisions of the
 Court of Appeal as he may consider necessary,
 (a) consisting of such number of Justices respec-
 tively as may be assigned thereto by the Chief
 Justice;
 (b) sitting at such places in Ghana as the Chief
 Justice may, by constitutional instrument,
 determine; and
 (c) presided over by the most senior of the Justices
 of the Court of Appeal constituting the Court.
 92
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 122. (1) The Court of Appeal shall have jurisdiction JuRmIcnON
 throughout Ghana to hear and determine, subject to the COUTOF
 provisions of this article and of this Constitution, appeals "PEu.
 from a judgment, decree or order of the High Court of
 Justice or a Justice thereof and such other appellate juris-
 diction as may be conferred upon it by this Constitution or
 any other law.
 (2) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
 an appeal shall lie as of right from a judgment, decree or
 order of the High Court of Justice to the Court of Appeal
 in any cause or matter determined by the High Court of
 Justice.
 (3) For the purposes of hearing and determining an
 appeal within its jurisdiction and the amendment, execution
 or the enforcement of a judgment or order made on any
 such appeal, and for the purposes of any other authority
 expressly or by necessary implication given to the Court of
 Appeal by this Constitution or any other law, the Court of
 Appeal shall have all the powers, authority and jurisdiction
 vested in the Court from which the appeal is brought.
 123. A single Justice of the Court of Appeal may exercise PoWMS OP
 a power vested in the Court of Appeal not involving the ^"'
 decision of the cause or matter before the Court of Appeal, OF Tim
 except that,                                            mACPu
 (a) in criminal matters, where that Justice refuses
 or grants an application in the exercise of any
 such power a person affected thereby shall be
 entitled to have the application determined by
 the Court of Appeal as duly constituted; and
 (b) in civil matters, any order, direction or decision
 made or given in pursuance of the powers
 conferred by this article may be varied, dis-
 charged or reversed by the Court of Appeal
 as duly constituted.
 The High Court of Justice
 124. (1) The High Court of Justice shall consist of-  CMPOSMoN
 OF THM
 (a) the Chief Justice;                         MOn COURT
 OF JU3C.
 93
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) not less than twelve Justices of the High
 Court of Justice; and
 (e) such other Justices of the Superior Court of
 Judicature as the Chief Justice may, for the
 determination of a particular cause or matter
 by writing under his hand, request to sit in the
 High Court of Justice for such period as the
 Chief Justice may specify or until the request
 is withdrawn.
 (2) The High Court of Justice shall be duly consti-
 tuted, as the case may be,
 (a) by any one Justice thereof; or
 (b) by any one Justice thereof and a jury,
 (i) for the trial of an offence on indict-
 ment, or
 (ii) in accordance with the provisions of
 paragraph (a) of clause (2) of article 26
 of this Constitution, for the trial of an
 offence, other than treason, the punish-
 ment for which is death or imprison-
 ment for life; or
 (c) by three Justices thereof, in accordance with
 the provisions of paragraph (h) of clause (2)
 of article 26 of this Constitution, for the trial
 of a person for the offence of treason.
 (3) There shall be in the High Court of Justice
 such Divisions consisting of such number of Justices res-
 pectively as may be assigned thereto by the Chief Justice;
 and sitting in such places in Ghana as the Chief Justice
 may determine.
 JURISDCHON  125. (1) The High Court of Justice shall have jurisdio-
 OF THE MHIG
 COUR O   tion in civil and criminal matters and such other original,
 mana.E appellate and other jurisdiction as may be conferred upon
 it by this Constitution or any other law.
 (2) The High Court of Justice shall have juris-
 diction to determine any matter relating to industrial and
 labour disputes and administrative complaints.
 (3) Parliament shall, by or under an Act of Parlia-
 ment, make provision for the exercise of the jurisdiction
 
 94
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 conferred on the High Court of Justice by the provisions
 of clause (2) of this article.
 (4) For the purposes of hearing and determining
 an appeal within its jurisdiction and the amendment,
 execution or the enforcement of a judgment or order
 made on any such appeal, and for the purposes of any
 other authority expressly or by necessary implication
 given to the High Court of Justice by this Constitution or
 any other law, the High Court of Justice shall have all the
 powers, authority and jurisdiction vested in the Court
 from which the appeal is brought.
 (5) A Justice of the High Court of Justice may,
 in accordance with Rules of Court made in that behalf,
 exercise in Court or in Chambers all or any part of the
 jurisdiction vested in the High Court of Justice by this
 Constitution or any other law.
 (6) The High Court of Justice shall have no power
 in a trial for the offence of treason to convict any person
 for any offence other than treason.
 126. The High Court of Justice shall have supervisory SUPERVISORY
 jurisdiction over all inferior Courts in Ghana and any
 adjudicating authority and in the exercise of its supervisory
 jurisdiction shall have power to issue such directions, orders
 or writs including writs or orders in the nature of habeas
 corpus, certiorari, mandamus, prohibition and quo warranto
 as it may consider appropriate for the purposes of
 enforcing or securing the enforcement of its supervisory
 powers.
 Miscellaneous
 127. (1) The Chief Justice and the other Justices of the ^;N"O
 Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President by JUScS.
 warrant under his hand and the Presidential seal,
 (a) in the case of the Chief Justice, acting in
 consultation with the Judicial Council;
 (b) in the case of the other Justices of the
 Supreme Court, acting on the advice of the
 Judicial Council,
 and with the approval of Parliament.
 95
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The other Justices of the Superior Court of Judi-
 cature shall be appointed by the President by warrant under
 his hand and the Presidential seal acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Judicial Council.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
 as .a Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature, unless
 he is a person of high moral character and has practised as
 counsel in a Court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil and
 criminal matters in Ghana or any other country having a
 system of law analogous to that of Ghana and approved
 by the Judicial Council, and has been entitled to practise
 as such counsel in the case of appointment to-
 (a) the Supreme Court, for not less than fifteen
 years; or
 (b) the Court of Appeal, for not less than twelve
 years; or
 (c) the High Court of Justice, for not less than
 ten years.
 (4) For the purposes of clause (3) of this article,
 a person shall be regarded as entitled to practise or as
 having practised as counsel if he has been called, enrolled
 or otherwise admitted as such and has not subsequently
 been disbarred or removed from the Roll of counsel or
 legal practitioners.
 (5) Where the office of the Chief Justice is vacant or
 where the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform
 the functions of his office, then,
 (a) until a person has been appointed to and has
 assumed the functions of that office, or
 (b) until the person holding that office has resumed
 the functions of that office, as the case may be,
 those functions shall be performed by the most senior for
 the time being of the Justices of the Supreme Court.
 (6) The office of a Justice of the Superior Court of
 Judicature shall not be abolished while there is a substantive
 holder thereof.
 (7) The provisions of article 205 of this Constitution
 relating to the declaration of assets and liabilities shall
 apply to a Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature and
 the holder of a judicial office.
 
 96
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (8) Subject to the provisions of clause (9) of this
 article, a Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature holding
 office as such immediately before the coming into force of
 this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed
 as from the coming into force of this Constitution to hold
 office as such under this Constitution.
 (9) A Justice to whom the provisions of clause (8)
 of this article apply shall, on the coming into force of this
 Constitution, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance
 and the judicial oath set out in the Second Schedule to this
 Constitution.
 (10) Where the office of a Justice of the High Court
 is vacant or for any reason a Justice thereof is unable
 to perform the functions of his office or if the Chief Justice
 advises the President that the state of business in the High
 Court of Justice so requires, the President may, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Judicial Council, appoint
 a person who has held office as, or a person qualified for
 appointment as, a Justice of the Superior Court of Judica-
 ture to act as a Justice of the High Court of Justice.
 (11) A person appointed under the provisions of
 clause (10) of this article to act as a Justice of the High
 Court of Justice shall continue to act for the period of his
 appointment or where no such period is specified until his
 appointment is revoked by the President, acting in accor-
 dance with the advice of the Judicial Council.
 (12) Notwithstanding the expiration of the period
 of his appointment or the revocation of his appointment
 under clause (11) of this article, a Justice so appointed may
 thereafter continue to act for as long as may be necessary
 to enable him to deliver judgment or do any other thing in
 relation to proceedings that were commenced before him
 previously thereto.
 128. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person TENUREOP
 holding office as a Justice of the Superior Court of Judica- OFFICE.
 ture-
 (a) may retire as such Justice at any time after
 attaining the age of sixty years; and
 (b) shall vacate that office-
 (i) on attaining the age of sixty-five years;
 97
 8A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (ii) upon his removal from office in accor-
 dance with the provisions of this article.
 (2) Notwithstanding that he has attained the age at
 which he is required by the provisions of this article to
 vacate his office, a person holding the office of a Justice of
 the Superior Court of Judicature may continue in office
 for so long after attaining that age as may be necessary to
 enable him to deliver judgment or do any other thing in
 relation to proceedings that were commenced before him
 previously thereto.
 (3) A Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature
 may resign from office by writing under his hand addressed
 to the President.
 (4) A Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature
 may be removed from office only for inability to perform
 the functions of his office arising from infirmity of body
 or mind or for stated misbehaviour, and shall not be so
 removed except in accordance with the provisions of this
 article.
 (5) For the purposes of the removal from office of a
 Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature, a petition in
 writing, stating that the Justice be removed on any of the
 grounds specified in clause (4) of this article, shall be
 presented to the President.
 (6) The petition referred to in clause (5) of this article
 shall set out in detail the facts, supported by the necessary
 documents, on which it is claimed that the Justice be
 removed from office.
 (7) In the case of a Justice of the Superior Court of
 Judicature, other than the Chief Justice, the President
 shall, upon the receipt of the petition referred to in clause
 (5) of this article, refer the petition to the Chief Justice for
 inquiry by a tribunal consisting of three Justices of the
 Superior Court of Judicature appointed by the Judicial
 Council.
 (8) In the case of the Chief Justice, the President,
 upon the receipt of the petition referred to in clause (5) of
 this article shall, acting in consultation- with the Council
 
 98
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 of State, appoint a tribunal to which he shall refer the
 petition, and which tribunal shall consist of-
 (a) three Justices of the Supreme Court, one of
 whom shall be appointed chairman by the
 President; and
 (b) two other persons who are not members of
 the Council of State nor members of Parlia-
 ment nor legal practitioners.
 (9) The tribunal appointed in accordance with the
 provisions of clauses (7) and (8) of this article shall inquire
 into the petition and recommend to the President whether
 the Justice or the Chief Justice, as the case may be, ought
 to be removed under the provisions of this article.
 (10) The President shall act in accordance with the
 recommendations of the- tribunal.
 (11) The proceedings for the removal from office of a
 Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature shall be held in
 camera, and any such Justice shall be entitled to be heard
 in his defence by himself or by counsel or other expert
 person of his own choice.
 (12) Where the question of removing a Justice of the
 Superior Court of Judicature under the provisions of this
 article has been referred to the appropriate tribunal, the
 President may-
 (a) in the case of the Chief Justice, acting in
 consultation with the Council of State, by
 warrant under his hand suspend the Chief
 Justice from performing the functions of his
 office; and any such suspension may at any
 time be revoked by the President; or
 (b) in the case of any other Justice, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Judicial
 Council, suspend that Justice from performing
 the functions of his office; and any such
 suspension may at any time be revoked by the
 President, acting in accordance with the advice
 of the Judicial Council.
 
 99
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (13) The suspension or removal shall in any case
 cease to have effect if the tribunal recommends to the
 President that the Chief Justice or the Justice, as the case
 may be, shall not be removed.
 RMm*       129. (1) The salaries, allowances, gratuities and pension
 of the Justices of the Superior Court of Judicature shall
 be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 (2) The salary, allowances and privileges, his rights
 in respect of leave of absence, gratuity or pension and other
 conditions of service of a Justice of the Superior Court of
 Judicature shall not be varied to his disadvantage.
 JUDICIAL 130. A Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature shall,
 OATH.     before assuming the functions of his office, take and sub-
 scribe before-
 (a) the President, in the case of the Chief Justice,
 and the other Justices of the Supreme Court; and
 (b) the Chief Justice, in the case of any other such
 Justice,
 the oath of allegiance and the judicial oath set out in
 the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 ICIAL.      131. (1) There shall be established a Judicial Council
 comU      which shall advise the Chief Justice in the performance of
 his administrative functions and perform such other func-
 tions as provided by this Constitution or by any other law.
 (2) The Judicial Council shall consist of-
 (a) the Chief Justice who shall be chairman; and
 (b) the most senior Justice of the Supreme Court,
 the most senior Justice of the Court of Appeal
 and the most senior Justice of the High Court
 of Justice;
 (c) the Attorney-General;
 (d) three persons, of not less than ten years'
 standing at the Bar, appointed by the Ghana
 Bar Association;
 
 100
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (e) a representative of the inferior bench; and
 (f) three other persons appointed by the President
 acting in consultation with the Council of
 State.
 (3) The Chief Justice shall, and except as otherwise
 provided in this Constitution, and subject to such advice
 as may be tendered by the Judicial Council, be responsible
 for the effective and efficient administration of the Judiciary.
 132. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the Apomr-
 power to appoint persons to hold or to act in a judicial 0m ,
 office to which this article applies shall vest, subject to the mAL
 approval of the President, in the Chief Justice acting in omCS.
 accordance with the advice of the Judicial Council.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this article, a person
 holding office as a judge or magistrate of the inferior
 Courts-
 (a) may retire from such office at any time after
 attaining the age of sixty years;
 (b) shall vacate that office on attaining the age of
 sixty-five years.
 (3) The provisions of clause (9) of article 114 of
 this Constitution shall apply to a Judge of an inferior Court
 or a Magistrate in the same way as they apply to a Justice of
 the Superior Court of Judicature.
 (4) The Chief Justice may, acting in accordance
 with the advice of the Judicial Council, and with the
 approval of the President, by constitutional instrument,
 make Regulations for the efficient performance of the
 functions of the Judicial Service and the Judicial Council
 under the provisions of this article.
 (5) A person holding a judicial office shall be
 removed from office by the Chief Justice on grounds only
 of stated misbehaviour or of infirmity of mind or body
 upon a resolution passed in that behalf and supported by
 the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of
 the Judicial Council.
 
 101
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) For the purposes of clause (5) of this article, any
 such person shall be entitled to be heard in his defence by
 himself or by counsel or other expert person of his own
 choice.
 (7) For the purposes of this Constitution, the expres-
 sion "judicial office " means,
 (a) the office of a Judge of an inferior Court or
 a Magistrate;
 (b) the office of the Judicial Secretary or Registrar
 of the Superior Court of Judicature; and
 (c) such other offices connected with any Court
 as may be prescribed by constitutional instru-
 ment made in that behalf by the Chief Justice
 acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Judicial Council and with the approval of the
 President.
 ULs OF    133. (1) There shall be established a Rules of Court
 COURT.   Committee which shall consist of-
 (a) the Chief Justice, who shall be chairman; and
 (b) the other members of the Judicial Council; and
 (c) one practising counsel of not less than ten
 years' standing and one practising counsel of
 not more than five years' standing both of
 whom shall be nominated by the Ghana Bar
 Association.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the Rules of Court Committee may, by constitutional
 instrument, make Rules of Court for regulating the practice
 and procedure of all Courts in Ghana, which shall include
 regulations relating to the prevention of frivolous and
 vexatious proceedings.
 OFICERS ND  134. (1) The appointment of officers and servants of the
 O    . Courts of Ghana shall, subject to the provisions of article
 132 of this Constitution, be made by the Chief Justice or
 such other Justice or officer of the Court as the Chief
 Justice may direct.
 
 102
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The Judicial Council shall, acting in consultation
 with the Public Services Commission and with the prior
 approval of the President, make Regulations by consti-
 tutional instrument prescribing the terms and conditions
 of service of officers and other employees of the Courts
 established by this Constitution or any other law.
 135. The fees, fines or other moneys taken by the Courts FES AND
 shall form part of the Consolidated Fund.                FINES.
 136. (1) Whenever in any proceedings in a Court, other DISCOVERY
 than the Supreme Court, a question arises as to the dis- OC
 covery of an official document and the person or authority
 having custody legal or otherwise of the document refuses,
 upon request, to produce that document on the ground-
 (a) that the document belongs to a class of docu-
 ments which it is prejudicial to the security
 of the State or injurious to the public interest
 to produce, or
 (b) that disclosure of the contents thereof will be
 prejudicial to the security of the State or
 injurious to the public interest,
 the Court shall stay the proceedings and refer the question
 to the Supreme Court for determination.
 (2) The Supreme Court may under clause (1) of this
 article-
 (a) order any person or authority having custody
 legal or otherwise of the document to produce
 it; and the person so ordered shall produce
 the document for the purpose of inspection
 by the Supreme Court; and
 (b) determine whether or not the document shall
 be produced in the Court from which the
 reference was made after hearing the parties
 thereto or their legal representatives or after
 having given them the opportunity of being
 heard.
 (3) Where the Supreme Court is of the opinion that
 the document shall be produced it shall make an order
 
 103
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 upon the person or authority having custody of the docu-
 ment to produce the same or so much of the contents there-
 of as is essential for the proceedings in accordance with the
 terms of the order.
 (4) Where the question of the discovery of an official
 document arises in any proceedings in the Supreme Court
 in the circumstances mentioned in clause (1) of this article,
 the Supreme Court shall be governed, mutatis mutandis, by
 the preceding provisions of this article for the determina-
 tion of the question that has arisen.
 (5) Proceedings under clauses (2), (3) and (4) of this
 article shall be in camera.
 SUCCESSION  137. (1) The High Court of Justice established under
 OF COURTS. clause (5) of article 114 of this Constitution, shall be the
 successor to the High Court of Justice in being immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution.
 (2) The Court of Appeal established under clause
 (5) of article 114 of this Constitution, shall be the successor
 to the Court of Appeal in being immediately before the
 coming into force of this Constitution; and accordingly the
 Court of Appeal as established by this Constitution shall be
 bound to follow the decisions on questions of law binding
 on the Court of Appeal as it existed immediately before the
 coming into force of this Constitution.
 
 104
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN
 FINANCE
 General
 138. (1) No taxation shall be imposed otherwise than by TAXATION.
 or under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 (2) Where an Act, enacted pursuant to clause (1) of
 this article, confers power on any person or authority to
 waive or vary a tax imposed by that Act, the exercise of
 the power of waiver or variation, in favour of any person
 or authority, shall be subject to the prior approval of Parlia-
 ment by resolution passed in that behalf.
 139. (1) There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which, THE CONSO-
 subject to the provisions of this article, shall be paid,  UD
 (a) all revenue or other moneys raised or received
 for the purposes of, or on behalf of, the
 Government; and
 (b) any other moneys raised or received in trust
 for, or on behalf of, the Government.
 (2) The revenues or other moneys referred to in
 clause (1) of this article shall not include revenues or other
 moneys,
 (a) that are payable by or under an Act of
 Parliament into some other fund established
 for specific purposes; or
 (b) that may, by or under an Act of Parliament,
 be retained by the department of government
 that received them for the purposes of defray-
 ing the expenses of that department.
 140. (1) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Con- mmAwA
 solidated Fund except-                                CONSOL-
 (a) to meet expenditure that is charged upon the DATED FUND,
 Fund by this Constitution or by an Act of E
 Parliament; or
 (b) where the issue of those moneys has been
 authorised,
 (i) by an Appropriation Act; or
 
 105
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (ii) by a supplementary estimate
 approved by a resolution of Parlia-
 ment passed in that behalf; or
 (iii) by an Act of Parliament enacted pur-
 suant to article 142 of this Constitu-
 tion; or
 (iv) by Rules or Regulations made under
 an Act of Parliament in respect of
 trust moneys paid into the Consoli-
 dated Fund.
 (2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public
 fund, other than the Consolidated Fund and the Contin-
 gency Fund, unless the issue of those moneys has been
 authorised by or under the authority of an Act of Parlia-
 ment.
 AUTHORISA-  141. (1) Parliament shall cause to be prepared and laid
 sxPN~TuE. before Parliament at least one month before the end of the
 financial year estimates of the revenues and expenditure of
 the Government of Ghana for the next following financial
 year.
 (2) The estimates of the expenditure of all public
 offices and public corporations, other than those set up as
 commercial ventures,
 (a) shall be classified under programmes or activi-
 ties which shall be included in a bill to be
 known as an Appropriation Bill and which
 shall be introduced into Parliament to provide
 for the issue from the Consolidated Fund or
 such other appropriate fund of the sums of
 money necessary to meet that expenditure and
 the appropriation of those sums for the pur-
 poses specified therein; and
 (b) shall, in respect of Consolidated Fundpayments,
 be laid before Parliament for the information of
 the members thereof.
 (3) Parliament shall prescribe the procedure for the
 presentation of Appropriation Bills.
 
 106
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) Where, in respect of a financial year, it is found
 that the amount of moneys appropriated by the Appro-
 priation Act for any purpose is insufficient or that a need
 has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no
 amount of moneys has been appropriated by that Act,
 a supplementary estimate showing the sum of money
 required shall be laid before Parliament.
 (5) Where, in respect of a financial year, a supple-
 mentary estimate has been approved by Parliament in
 accordance with the provisions of clause (4) of this article,
 a supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be introduced
 into Parliament in the financial year next following the
 financial year to which the estimate relates, providing for
 the appropriation of the sums so approved for the purposes
 specified in that estimate.
 (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of the preced-
 ing clauses of this article, the President may cause to be
 prepared and laid before Parliament estimates of revenue
 and expenditure of Ghana for periods of over one year.
 142. Where it appears to the President that the Appropria- neE-
 tion Act in respect of any financial year vill not come into ADVANCE OF
 operation by the beginning of that financial year, he may, AOP
 with the prior approval of Parliament signified in that behalf
 by a resolution thereof, authorise the withdrawal of moneys
 from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes of meeting
 expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Govern-
 ment in respect of the period expiring three months from
 the beginning of the financial year or on the coming into
 operation of the Act whichever is earlier.
 143. (1) There shall be a Contingency Fund into which 0"
 shall be paid moneys voted for that purpose by Parliament Erc.
 and from which advances may be authorised by the
 committee responsible for financial measures in Parlia-
 ment appointed pursuant to the provisions of article 85 of
 this Constitution, whenever that committee is satisfied
 that there has arisen an urgent or unforeseen need for
 expenditure for which no other provision exists to meet
 that need.
 (2) Where an advance is made from the Contingency
 Fund a supplementary estimate shall be presented as soon
 
 107
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 as possible to Parliament for the purpose of replacing the
 amount so advanced.
 (3) Whenever in the estimates prepared pursuant to
 clauses (1) and (4) of article 141 of this Constitution provi-
 sion is made for an item or vote other than for the Con-
 tingency Fund, not relating to a specific item of expenditure,
 any moneys voted by Parliament in respect of that item
 or vote shall be under the control and supervision of a
 committee which shall consist of the President, the Speaker
 and the chairman of the Council of State.
 LOANS.     144. (1) Parliament may, by a resolution passed in that
 behalf and supported by the votes of a majority of all the
 members of Parliament, authorise the Government to enter
 into an agreement for the granting of a loan out of any
 public fund or public account.
 (2) An agreement entered into pursuant to clause
 (1) of this article shall be laid before Parliament and
 shall not come into operation unless the same has been
 approved by a resolution of Parliament.
 (3) No loan shall be raised by the Government on
 behalf of itself or any other public institution or authority
 otherwise than by or under the authority of an Act of
 Parliament.
 (4) An Act of Parliament enacted in accordance
 with clause (3) of this article shall provide-
 (a) that the terms and conditions of a loan shall be
 laid before Parliament and shall not come into
 operation unless the same has been approved by
 a resolution of Parliament; and
 (b) that any moneys received in respect of that
 loan shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund
 and form part thereof or into some other public
 fund of Ghana either existing or created for the
 purposes of the loan.
 (5) For the purposes of this article, the expression
 "loan " includes any moneys lent or given to or by the
 
 108
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 Government on condition of return or repayment and any
 other form of borrowing or lending in respect of which-
 (a) moneys from the Consolidated Fund or any
 other public fund may be used for payment or
 repayment; or
 (b) moneys from any fund by whatever name
 called established for the purposes of payment
 or repayment whether in whole or in part and
 whether directly or indirectly may be used for
 payment or repayment.
 145. (1) The public debt of Ghana shall be charged PUBLIC DEBT.
 upon the Consolidated Fund and other public funds of
 Ghana.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, the public debt
 shall include interest on that debt, sinking fund payments
 and redemption moneys in respect of that debt and the
 costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management
 of that debt.
 146. (1) The Bank of Ghana shall operate as a central THE
 bank and shall be the only authority to issue the currency BANK
 of the state of Ghana.
 (2) The Bank of Ghana shall be the sole custodian
 of state funds both in and outside Ghana and may, by
 constitutional instrument, authorize any other person or
 authority to act as a custodian of such funds of the Govern-
 ment as may be specified in the instrument.
 (3) In the performance of his functions under this
 Constitution or any other law, the Governor of the Bank
 of Ghana shall have power to disallow any transaction or
 transfer of any foreign exchange both in and outside Ghana,
 which is contrary to law.
 147. (1) The committee set up under the provisions of POREIGN
 paragraph (f) of clause (1) of article 85 of this Constitution DEALINGS.
 shall monitor the foreign exchange receipts and payments
 or transfers of the Bank of Ghana in and outside Ghana
 and shall report to Parliament once in every six months.
 
 109
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The Bank of Ghana shall, not later than three
 months,
 (a) after the end of the first six months of its
 financial year; and
 (b) after the end of its financial year,
 submit to the Auditor-General for audit a statement of its
 foreign exchange receipts and payments or transfers in and
 outside Ghana.
 (3) The Auditor-General shall, not later than three
 months after the submission of the statement referred to
 in clause (1) of this article, submit his report to Parliament
 on the statement.
 (4) Parliament shall debate the report of the
 Auditor-General and appoint where necessary in the public
 interest a committee to deal with any matters arising from
 the report.
 FORWION     148. (1) Any person not being a citizen of Ghana who
 PARTICIPA  does not bring into Ghana foreign capital, of such amount
 BUSIESS,  as may be specified by or under an Act of Parliament, for
 erC.      the purposes of establishing a business in Ghana shall not
 engage in the import or export trade or in any industry.
 (2) The provisions of clause (1) of this article shall
 apply to-
 (a) any such person as is referred to in clause (1)
 who subsequently becomes a citizen of Ghana;
 and
 (b) any person who, on the coming into force of
 this Constitution, is engaged in any trade,
 business or industry in respect of which he did
 not bring into Ghana foreign capital.
 (3) Parliament shall, within six months of the
 coming into force of this Constitution, enact a law to give
 effect to or enable effect to be given to the provisions of this
 article.
 The Statistical Service
 $MATISTICAL  149. (1) There shall be a Statistical Service which shall
 SERVICE   form part of the public services of Ghana.
 
 110
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The head of the Statistical Service shall be the
 Government Statistician.
 (3) The Government Statistician shall be appointed
 by the President in consultation with the Statistical Service
 Board.
 150. (1) There shall be a Statistical Service Board which STATISTICAL
 . SERVICB
 shall consist of-                                        BOARD.
 (a) a chairman and not more than five other
 members all of whom shall be appointed by the
 President having regard to their expert know-
 ledge, in consultation with the Council of State,
 and
 (b) the Government Statistician who shall be an ex
 officio member of the Board.
 (2) The Government Statistician, under the super-
 vision of the Statistical Service Board, shall be responsible
 for the collection, compilation, analysis and publication of
 socio-economic data on Ghana and shall perform such other
 functions as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parlia-
 ment.
 (3) The Statistical Service Board may prescribe the
 manner in which data may be compiled and kept by any
 person or authority in Ghana.
 The Auditor-General
 151. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General of Ghana THE AUDITOR-
 whose office shall be a public office.                  GENERAL.
 (2) The public accounts of Ghana and of all public
 offices, including the Courts, the central and local govern-
 ment administrations, of the Universities and public institu-
 tions of like nature, of any public corporation or other
 body or organisation established by an Act of Parliament
 shall be audited and reported on by the Auditor-General.
 (3) For the purposes of clause (2) of this article,
 the Auditor-General or any person authorised or appointed
 in that behalf by the Auditor-General shall have access to
 all books, records, returns and other documents relating or
 relevant to those accounts.
 Ill
 9
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) The public accounts of Ghana and of all other
 persons or authorities referred to in clause (2) of this
 article shall be kept in such form as the Auditor-General
 shall approve.
 (5) The Auditor-General shall, within six months
 of the end of the immediately preceding financial year,
 to which each of the accounts mentioned in clause (2) of
 this article relates, submit his report to Parliament and
 shall in that report draw attention to irregularities in the
 accounts audited and to any other matter which in his opinion
 ought to be brought to the notice of Parliament.
 (6) Parliament shall debate the report of the Auditor-
 General and appoint where necessary in the public interest
 a committee to deal with any matters arising therefrom.
 (7) In the performance of his functions under this
 Constitution or any other law the Auditor-General,
 (a) shall not be subject to the direction or control
 of any other person or authority;
 (b) shall have power to disallow any item of
 expenditure which is contrary to law and to
 surcharge,
 (i) the amount of any expenditure dis-
 allowed upon the person respons-
 ible for incurring or authorising that
 expenditure; or
 (ii) any sum which has not been duly
 brought into account upon the person
 by whom the sum ought to have
 been brought into account; or
 (iii) the amount of any loss or deficiency
 upon any person by whose negligence
 or misconduct the loss or deficiency
 has been incurred.
 (8) The provisions of paragraph (a) of clause (7)
 of this article shall not preclude the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Council of State, from
 requesting the Auditor-General in the public interest to
 audit, at any particular time, the accounts of any such body
 or organisation as is referred to in clause (2) of this article,
 
 112
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (9) A person aggrieved by a disallowance or sur-
 charge made by the Auditor-General may appeal to the
 High Court of Justice.
 (10) The Rules of Court Committee may, by con-
 stitutional instrument, make Rules of Court for the purposes
 of clause (9) of this article.
 (11) The salary and allowances payable to the
 Auditor-General shall be a charge upon the Consolidated
 Fund.
 (12) The salary and allowances payable to the
 Auditor-General, his rights in respect of leave of absence,
 retiring award or retiring age shall not be varied to his
 disadvantage during his tenure of office.
 (13) The provisions of article 128 of this Constitu-
 tion relating to the removal of a Justice of the Superior
 Court of Judicature from office shall apply to the Auditor-
 General.
 (14) The administrative expenses of the office of
 the Auditor-General including all salaries, allowances,
 gratuities and pensions payable to or in respect of persons
 serving in the Audit Service shall be a charge upon the
 Consolidated Fund.
 (15) The accounts of the office of the Auditor-
 General shall be audited and reported upon by an auditor
 appointed by Parliament.
 (16) A person appointed to be the Auditor-General
 of Ghana shall, before entering upon the duties of his
 office, take and subscribe the Oath of the Auditor-General
 set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
 The Audit Service
 152. There shall be an Audit Service which shall form THE AUDIT
 part of the Public Services of Ghana.                  SERVIGB.
 153. (1) There shall be an Audit Service Board which THE AUDIT
 shall consist of a chairman and four other members all of SERVICE
 whom   shall be appointed by the President, acting in BOARD.
 accordance with the advice of the Council of State, the
 Auditor-General and the Head of the Civil Service or
 his representative who shall be ex officio members of the
 Audit Board.
 113
 9A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The appointment of officers and other emplo-
 yees in the Audit Service, other than the Auditor-
 General, shall be made by the Audit Service Board, acting
 in consultation with the Public Services Commission.
 (3) The Audit Service Board shall, acting in con-
 sultation with the Public Services Commission, and with
 the prior approval of the Council of State, make Regula-
 tions by constitutional instrument prescribing the terms
 and conditions of service of officers and other employees
 in the Audit Service and generally for the effective and
 efficient administration of the Audit Service.
 (4) A member of the Audit Service Board, other
 than an ex officio member, may be removed from office by
 the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Council of State, for inability to perform the functions of
 his office whether arising from infirmity of mind or body
 or for any other sufficient cause.
 
 I4
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 THE PUBLIC SERVICES
 154. (1) The public services of Ghana shall include the THE Punic
 Civil Service, the Judicial Service, the Audit Service, the SERVICES.
 Education Service, the Prisons Service, the Parliamentary
 Service, the Health Service, the Statistical Service, the Fire
 Service, the Customs and Preventive Service and public
 corporations, other than those set up as commercial
 ventures, which shall constitute the Public Corporations
 Service and such other public services established by this
 Constitution or as Parliament may by law prescribe.
 (2) The Civil Service shall comprise service in both
 central and local government.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 an Act of Parliament enacted pursuant to clause (1) of this
 article, shall provide-
 (a) for the governing council for the public service
 concerned;
 (b) for the functions of that Service; and
 (c) for the membership and staff of that Service.
 155. No member of the public services shall be- PRoTEcnION
 FOR PUBLIC
 (a) victimised or discriminated against for having omcES.
 discharged his duties faithfully in accordance
 with this Constitution;
 (b) dismissed or removed from office or reduce
 in rank or otherwise punished without just
 cause.
 156. (1) There shall be a Public Services Commission THE PUBUC
 which shall perform such functions as are assigned to it by COMMSON.
 this Constitution or by any other law.
 (2) The Public Services Commission shall consist of-
 (a) a chairman and a vice-chairman;
 (b) the chairmen of the governing councils of the
 public services provided for in clause (1) of
 z   article 154 of this Constitution or their represen-
 tatives as ex officio members; and
 
 115
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) such other members as Parliament may,
 subject to the provisions of article 57 of this
 Constitution, by law prescribe.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
 as a member of the Public Services Commission,
 (a) if he is not qualified to be elected as a member
 of Parliament; or
 (b) if he is otherwise disqualified from holding a
 public office.
 (4) A person holding a public office, other than a
 chief, appointed a member of the Public Services Commis-
 sion, shall resign from that public office.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of clause (6) of this
 article the terms of service of a Justice of the Court of
 Appeal shall apply to the chairman and the vice-chairman
 of the Public Services Commission.
 (6) The provisions of article 128 of this Constitu-
 tion relating to the removal from office of a Justice of the
 Superior Court of Judicature, shall apply,
 (a) to the chairman and the vice-chairman of the
 Public Services Commission who shall retire
 at the age of sixty-five years; and
 (b) to the other members of the Public Services
 Commission before the expiration of their
 period of service as provided by Parliament.
 (7) Whenever the office of the chairman of the
 Public Services Commission is vacant or if the person hold-
 ing that office is for any reason unable to perforni the func-
 tions of that office, the functions of that office shall be
 performed by the vice-chairman and in the absence of both
 the chairman and the vice-chairman by any other member
 of the Public Services Commission designated in that behalf
 by the President.
 ^PPOr c.    157. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 OF PUBUC  the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in an office
 OFFICERS.  in the public services, shall vest in the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the governing council of
 the Service concerned given in consultation with the Public
 Services Commission.
 
 116
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The President may, subject to such conditions
 as he may think fit, delegate some of his functions under
 this article by directions in writing to the governing council
 concerned or to a committee thereof or to any member of
 that governing council or to any public officer.
 (3) No person shall be appointed under the pro-
 visions of this article to an office on the personal or house-
 hold staff of the President or the Vice-President except with
 the consent, as the case may be, of the President or the
 Vice-President.
 (4) Before the Public Services Commission appoints
 to a public office a person holding or acting in an office
 the power to make appointment to which is not vested in
 the Public Services Commission, it shall consult the person
 or authority in whom that power is vested.
 (5) The Public Services Commission shall, upon
 request made to it by a person or authority having power to
 make an appointment to an office under this Constitution
 or in any other public institution, make recommendations
 to that person or authority for the appointment of a public
 officer or any other person to an office the power to make
 appointment to which is vested by this Constitution in that
 person, authority or public institution.
 (6) The Public Services Commission may, subject to
 the approval of the President, make Regulations, by constitu-
 tional instrument, for the effective and efficient perform-
 ance of its functions under this Constitution or any other law.
 (7) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
 the Public Services Commission shall not be subject to the
 control or direction of any other person or authority in the
 performance of its functions under this Constitution or any
 other law.
 (8) The power to appoint persons to hold or act
 in an office in a body of higher education, research or
 professional training shall vest in the council or other
 governing body of that institution or body.
 (9) The provisions of article 76 of this Constitution
 other than paragraphs (a) and (b) of clause (1), and para-
 graphs (a), (g), (h) and (k) of clause (2) thereof and also,
 
 117
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 paragraph (b) of clause (3) of article 156 shall with such
 modifications as may be appropriate, apply to the appoint-
 ment of a person to be a member of a public board or a
 public corporation.
 OTHER       158. (1) It shall be the duty of the Public Services Com-
 FUNCTIONS
 OF THE   mission-
 PUBLIC
 SERVICES          (a) to conduct or cause to be conducted on its
 COMMISSION.          behalf or on behalf of the appropriate govern-
 ing council of the public services examinations
 for appointments to any office in the public
 services including service with a public
 corporation where examinations are prescribed
 by Regulations made in that behalf;
 (b) to assist in framing and operating schemes of
 joint recruitment to offices in the public
 services and public corporations for which
 candidates possessing special qualifications are
 required, including schemes for the determi-
 nation and standardisation of salaries and
 other conditions of service in the public services
 and public corporations;
 (c) to prescribe the methods of recruitment to
 offices in the public services and public
 corporations in consultation with the appro-
 priate authority responsible for appointment
 to such offices;
 (d) to prescribe the principles to be followed in
 making appointments to posts in the public
 services and public corporations and in making
 promotions and transfers from one service to
 another and on the suitability of candidates
 for such appointments, promotions or transfers
 in consultation with the appropriate authority
 responsible for the public services or public
 corporation concerned; and
 (e) to prescribe the principles to be followed in
 the establishment and operation of joint
 negotiating committees and disciplinary bodies
 in the public services and public corporations.
 
 118
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) For the purposes of this article the expression
 "public corporation " means a public corporation estab-
 lished pursuant to article 159 of this Constitution other than
 one of the nature of a commercial venture.
 159. For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared ESTABLISH-
 that no public corporation shall be established or operated MEBNT F
 except by an Act of Parliament.                          CORPO RA-
 TIONS.
 160. (1) The President shall, acting in accordance with HEAD OF
 THE CIVIL
 the advice of the Public Services Commission, ap'point a    v
 public officer as the Head of the Civil Service.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the Head of the Civil Service shall not hold any other public
 office.
 161. A public officer holding office as such immediately EXISTING
 before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be omCES.
 deemed to have been appointed under this Constitution to
 hold office as such in accordance with the provisions of
 this Constitution.
 162. (1) A public officer shall, except as otherwise provided  No
 in this Constitution, retire from the public service on attain- AGE.
 ing the age of sixty years.
 (2) A public officer may retire from the public
 service at any time after attaining the age of forty-five years.
 (3) The pension payable to any person shall not be
 subject to income tax.
 
 119
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER FrEEN
 THE PRISONS SERVICE
 THE PRISONS  163. There shall be a Prisons Service which shall form
 SERVICE.  part of the Public Services of Ghana.
 THE PRISONS  164. (1) There shall be established a Prisons Service
 SERVICE
 COUNCIL.  Council which shall consist of-
 (a) the Minister for the time being holding the
 portfolio of internal affairs who shall be chair-
 man;
 (b) the Director of Prisons;
 (c) a medical officer nominated by the Ghana
 Medical Association;
 (d) a legal practitioner nominated by the Ghana
 Bar Association;
 (e) a representative of the ministry or department
 of State responsible for social welfare;
 (f) a representative of such religious organisations
 as the President may, in consultation with the
 Council of State, appoint; and
 (g) two other members, one of whom at least shall
 be a woman, all of whom shall be appointed
 by the President.
 (2) The Director of Prisons shall be appointed by
 the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Prisons Service Council.
 (3) The Director of Prisons shall, subject to the
 provisions of this article and to the control and direction of
 the Prisons Service Council, be responsible for the opera-
 tional control and the administration of the Prisons Service
 as a whole.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in an office
 in the Prisons Service shall vest in the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Prisons Service Council.
 (5) The President may, subject to such conditions
 as he thinks fit, delegate some of his functions under this
 article by directions in writing to the Prisons Service Coun-
 cil or to a committee thereof or to a member of the Council.
 
 120
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 165. (1) The Prisons Service Council shall advise the Fuacnow
 President on all matters of policy relating to the organisa- PR SONS
 tion and maintenance of the prisons system in Ghana SmvcE
 including the role of the Prisons Service, prisons budgeting
 and finance, administration and the promotion of officers
 above the rank of Assistant Director of Prisons or its
 equivalent.
 (2) The Prisons Service Council shall, acting in
 consultation with the Public Services Commission and with
 the prior approval of the President, make Regulations, by
 constitutional instrument, prescribing the conditions of
 service of officers and other employees of the Prisons
 Service.
 (3) The Prisons Service Council may, with the prior
 approval of the President, by constitutional instrument,
 make Regulations for the performance of its functions
 under this Constitution or any other law and for the effec-
 tive and efficient administration of the Prisons Service.
 (4) Regulations made under clause (3) of this article
 shall include provisions relating to-
 (a) the control and administration of the Prisons
 Service;
 (b) the ranks of officers of the Prisons Service,
 the members of each such rank and the use of
 uniforms by the officers;
 (c) the authority and powers of command of the
 officers of the Prisons Service;
 (d) the delegation to other persons of powers
 to discipline persons and the conditions subject
 to which delegations may be made;
 (e) the parole system and the review of the con-
 ditions of prisoners and all other persons in
 legal custody at intervals of not less than two
 years;
 (f) the conditions under which persons may be
 admitted into prisons;
 
 121
 
 
 The Consitution
 
 (g) the making of reports of unjustified treatment
 of, and cruelty to, prisoners and persons in
 legal custody and the manner in which the
 reports shall be dealt with;
 (h) the appointment and composition of welfare
 committees for prisoners and discharged
 prisoners and other persons released from legal
 custody;
 (i) ready access by legal practitioners to prisoners
 and other persons in legal custody; and
 (j) such measures, generally, as will ensure the
 welfare of prisoners and other persons in legal
 custody, including the provision of literature
 and writing material.
 REGIONAL    166. (1) There shall be established in each region, a
 COMIEES. regional prisons committee which shall consist of-
 (a) the Minister of State appointed for the Region,
 who shall be chairman;
 (b) the most senior prisons officer in the Region;
 (c) a representative of the Attorney-General;
 (d) a legal practitioner nominated by the Ghana
 Bar Association;
 (e) the regional medical officer of health;
 (f) the regional director of social welfare;
 (g) a representative of the Christian Council;
 (h) a representative of the National Catholic
 Secretariat; and
 (i) a representative of the Muslim Council.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the regional prisons
 committee to advise the Prisons Council and the Director
 of Prisons on any matter relating to the administration of
 Prisons and of the Prisons Service in the Region.
 
 122
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER SIXTEEN
 THE ARMED FORCES OF GHANA
 167. (1) There shall be the Armed Forces of Ghana THE ARMED
 which shall consist of the Army, the Navy and the Air   R  OF
 Force and such other branches for which provision is made
 by Parliament.
 (2) No persons shall raise an armed force except by
 or under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
 168. There shall be established an Armed Forces Council T"' MED
 which shall consist of-                              I COUNCI
 (a) the Vice-President, who shall be chairman; and
 (b) the Ministers for the time being holding the
 p--rfolios of defence, foreign affairs and internal
 affairs; and
 (c) the Chief of Defence Staff; and
 (d) two other persons as the President shall, acting
 in accordance with the advice of the Council of
 State, appoint.
 169. (1) There shall be appointed by the President, acting ^PPOINr-
 in accordance with the advice of the Armed Forces Council, MENTS, ETC.
 (a) the Chief of Defence Staff of the Armed
 Forces; and
 (b) the service commanders of the Army, the Navy
 and the Air Force.
 (2) The Chief of Defence Staff of the Armed Forces
 shall, subject to the provisions of this article and to the
 control or direction of the Armed Forces Council on matters
 of policy, be responsible for the administration as well as
 the operational control and command of the Armed Forces
 as a whole.
 (3) The President may, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Armed Forces Council, appoint officers
 of the Armed Forces who shall be given such command as
 the Armed Forces Council shall determine.
 
 123
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) The President shall, acting in accordance with
 the advice of the Armed Forces Council, grant commis-
 sions to officers of the Armed Forces.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of clause (4) of this
 article, the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in
 an office in the Armed Forces shall vest in the President,
 acting in accordance with the advice of the Armed Forces
 Council.
 DELECITON 170. The Armed Forces Council may, subject to such
 macrnoNS. conditions as it may think fit, delegate some of its functions
 under this article by directions in writing to a committee
 thereof or to a member of the Council.
 OF T      171. (1) The Armed Forces Council shall advise the
 ARMED    President on all major matters of policy relating to defence
 FM      and strategy including the role of the Armed Forces,
 military budgeting and finance, administration and the
 promotion of officers above the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel
 or its equivalent.
 (2) The Armed Forces Council may, with the prior
 approval of the President, by constitutional instrument,
 make Regulations for the performance of its functions under
 this Constitution or any other law, and for the effective
 and efficient administration of the Armed Forces.
 (3) Regulations made under clause (2) of this article
 shall include regulations in respect of-
 (a) the control and administration of the services
 of the Armed Forces;
 (b) the ranks of officers and men of each Armed
 Force, the members in each such rank and the
 use of uniforms by the men:
 (c) the conditions of service, including conditions
 of service relating to the enrolment and to the
 pay, pensions, gratuities and other allowances
 of officers and men of each service and deduc-
 tions therefrom;
 
 124
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (d) the authority and powers of command ot
 officers and men of each service;
 (e) the delegation to other persons of powers of
 commanding officers to try accused persons
 and the conditions subject to which delegations
 may be made; and
 (f) the establishment of research and development
 units in each service.
 
 125
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CIAPTER SEVENTEEN
 THE POLICE SERVICE
 rHE POLICE  172. (1) There shall be a Police Service of Ghana.
 SERVICE.
 (2) No person or authority shall raise any Police
 Service except by or under the authority of an Act of
 Parliament.
 THE POLICE  173. (1) There shall be established a Police Council
 COUNCIL. which shall consist of-
 (a) the Vice-President, who shall be chairman;
 (b) the Inspector-General of Police;
 (c) a representative of the Attorney-General;
 (d) the minister responsible for internal affairs;
 (e) a legal practitioner of not less than ten years'
 standing nominated by the Ghana Bar Associa-
 tion; and
 (f) not more than three other members, one of
 whom shall be a person who shall have held
 office as a senior police officer, as the Presi-
 dent may, acting in accordance with the advice
 of the Council of State, appoint.
 (2) The Inspector-General of Police shall be
 appointed by the President acting in accordance with the
 advice of the Police Council.
 (3) The Inspector-General of Police shall, subject
 to the provisions of this article and to the control and
 direction of the Police Council, be responsible for the
 operational control and the administration of the Police
 Service.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in an office
 in the Police Service shall vest in the President, acting in
 accordance with the advice of the Police Council.
 (5) The President may, subject to such conditions
 as he thinks fit, delegate some of his functions under this
 article by directions in writing to the Police Council or to
 a <ommittee thereof or to a member of the Council.
 
 126
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 174. (1) The Police Council shall advise the President roNerson
 . . .OF THE
 on all major matters of policy relating to internal security POLICE
 including the role of the Police Service, budgeting and couNcI-
 finance, administration and the promotion of officers
 above the rank of Assistant Commissioner of Police or its
 equivalent.
 (2) The Police Council may, with the prior approval
 of the President, by constitutional instrument, make Regula-
 tions for the performance of its functions under this Con-
 stitution or any other law and for the effective and efficient
 administration of the Police Service.
 (3) Regulations made under clause (2) of this
 article shall include regulations in respect of-
 (a) the control of administration of the Police
 Service;
 (b) the ranks of officers and men of each unit of
 the Police Service, the members of such ranks
 and the use of uniforms by the members;
 (c) the conditions of service including conditions
 of service relating to the enrolment, the pay,
 pension, gratuities and other allowances of
 officers and men of each unit and deductions
 therefrom;
 (d) the authority and powers of command of
 officers and men of the Police Service; and
 (e) the delegation to other persons of powers to
 discipline persons and the conditions subject
 to which delegations may be made.
 175. (1) There shall be established for each Region a REGIONAL
 regional police committee which shall consist of-       COMETTEES.
 (a) the Minister of State appointed for the Region,
 who shall be chairman;
 (b) the two most senior officers of the Police
 Service in the Region;
 (c) a representative of each of the administrative
 districts in the Region appointed by the district
 council in each such district; and
 127
 10
 
 
 The Constitulion
 
 (d) a legal practitioner nominated by the Ghana
 Bar Association;
 (e) a representative of the Attorney-General; and
 (f) a representative of the Regional House of
 Chiefs.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the regional police
 committee to advise the Police Council on any matter
 relating to the administration of the Police Service in the
 Region.
 
 128
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
 NATIONAL SERVICE
 176. (1) Parliament shall, within one year after the NATIONAL
 SERVICB
 coming into force of this Constitution, by or under an Act BOARD.
 of Parliament provide for-
 (a) the establishment of a national service scheme
 which may include military training; and
 (b) the establishment of a board to be known as the
 National Service Board.
 (2) The Board shall consist of a chairman and
 seven other members, all of whom shall be appointed by the
 President, acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Council of State.
 (3) An Act passed pursuant to clause (1) of this
 article shall provide-
 (a) for the organisation of a national service
 scheme under which citizens of Ghana who
 have attained the age of eighteen years or more
 may engage in national service;
 (b) for the areas of activity for the purpose of
 service under the scheme;
 (c) for the conditions under which a person may
 be engaged under the scheme or be exempted
 from national service; and
 (d) for such other purposes as Parliament may
 consider necessary.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
 and any Act passed by Parliament pursuant to clause (1)
 of this article, the National Service Board shall, with the
 prior approval of the President, by constitutional instru-
 ment, make Regulations for the performance of its functions
 under this Constitution or any other law for the effective
 and efficient administration of the national service scheme.
 129
 10A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER NINETEEN
 CHIEFTAINCY
 INMT=ON     177. (1) The institution of chieftaincy together with its
 AWCE. traditional councils as established by customary law and
 usage is hereby guaranteed.
 (2) Pursuant to clause (1) of this article, Parliament
 shall have no power to enact any legislation-
 (a) which confers on any person or authority the
 right to accord or withdraw recognition to or
 from a chief; or
 (b) which in any way detracts or derogates from
 the honour and dignity of the institution of
 chieftaincy.
 (3) Nothing contained in or done under the autho-
 rity of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with, or in
 contravention of, the provisions of clause (2) of this article
 to the extent that the law in question makes provision-
 (a) for the determination, in accordance with the
 appropriate customary law and usage, by a
 traditional council, a Regional House of Chiefs
 or the National House of Chiefs or a chief-
 taincy tribunal thereof, of the validity of the
 nomination, election, installation or deposition
 of a person as a chief;
 (b) for a traditional council or a Regional House
 of Chiefs or the National House of Chiefs to
 establish and operate a procedure for the
 registration of chiefs and the public notification
 in the Gazette or otherwise of the status of
 persons as chiefs in Ghana.
 NATIONAL   178. (1) There shall be established a National House
 MUS o   of Chiefs.
 (2) The House of Chiefs of each Region shall elect
 as members of the National House of Chiefs five paramount
 chiefs from the Region.
 
 130
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) Where in a Region there are less than five
 paramount chiefs, the House of Chiefs of the Region shall
 elect, for the purposes of clause (2) of this article, such
 number of divisional chiefs as shall make up the required
 representation of chiefs for the Region.
 (4) The National House of Chiefs shall advise any
 person or authority charged with any responsibility under
 this Constitution or any other law for any matter relating
 to or affecting chieftaincy.
 (5) Subject to the provisions of clause (2) of article 4
 of this Constitution, the National House of Chiefs-
 (a) shall undertake the progressive study, inter-
 pretation and codification of customary law
 with a view to evolving, in appropriate cases, a
 unified system of rules of customary law; and
 (b) shall publish in the Gazette, within three years
 of the coming into force of this Constitution or
 within such period as Parliament may determine,
 a list of all the principal stools and skins, the
 applicable customary law and usage appertain-
 ing thereto, and the system of succession by the
 respective families and their lineages; and
 (c) shall perform such other functions, not being
 inconsistent with any function performable by
 the House of Chiefs of a Region, as Parliament
 may, by or under an Act of Parliament, confer
 on it or otherwise refer to it.
 (6) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the National House of Chiefs existing immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed
 to have been established from the coming into force of this
 Constitution as the National House of Chiefs.
 179. (1) The National House of Chiefs shall have appellate NATIONAL
 jurisdiction in any matter relating to chieftaincy which has TMT CV
 been determined by the Regional House of Chiefs in a
 Region, from which appellate jurisdiction there shall be an
 appeal, with the leave of the Supreme Court or ofthe National
 House of Chiefs, to the Supreme Court.
 
 131
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) The appellate jurisdiction of the National House
 of Chiefs as provided under clause (1) of this article shall be
 exercised by a national chieftaincy tribunal consisting of five
 persons appointed by that House from among its members.
 (3) A national chieftaincy tribunal appointed under
 clause (2) of this article shall be assisted by counsel of not
 less than seven years' standing appointed by the National
 House of Chiefs on the recommendations of the Attorney-
 General.
 (4) A member of a national chieftaincy tribunal
 may be removed from office on the grounds only of stated
 misbehaviour or of infirmity of mind or body by the votes
 of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the National
 House of Chiefs.
 (5) A national chieftaincy tribunal established under
 this article shall have original jurisdiction in any matter
 relating to chieftaincy-
 (a) which lies within the competence of two or
 more Regional Houses of Chiefs, or
 (b) which is not properly cognizable by a Regional
 House of Chiefs, or
 (c) which cannot otherwise be dealt with by a
 Regional House of Chiefs.
 (6) An appeal shall lie in respect of any matter
 dealt with by a national chieftaincy tribunal under clause
 (5) of this article to the Supreme Court.
 REGIONAL   180. (1) There shall be established in and for each
 BOUSE OP
 CHIES.   Region a Regional House of Chiefs.
 (2) The Regional House of Chiefs shall-
 (a) have original jurisdiction in all matters relat-
 ing to a paramount stool or the occupant of
 a paramount stool, including a queen-mother
 to a paramount stool;
 (b) perform in and for the Region such other
 functions as may be conferred upon it by or
 under the authority of an Act of Parliament;
 
 132
 
 
 The Constitution
 (c) advise any person or authority charged with
 a responsibility under this Constitution or
 any other law for any matter relating to or
 affecting chieftaincy in the Region;
 (d) establish a regional chieftaincy tribunal to
 hear and determine appeals from the highest
 traditional council within the area of authority
 of the traditional authority within which they
 are established in respect of the nomination,
 election, installation or deposition of a person
 as a chief;
 (e) be the authority that shall be responsible for
 the recovery or delivery or custody of stool or
 skin property whenever there is a dispute in
 respect of the status of any person as a chief.
 (3) The regional chieftaincy tribunal established
 under clause (2) of this article shall consist of three chiefs
 appointed by the Regional House of Chiefs from among its
 members.
 (4) A regional chieftaincy tribunal shall be assisted
 by counsel of not less than five years' standing appointed
 by the Regional House of Chiefs on the recommendations
 of the Attorney-General.
 (5) A member of the regional chieftaincy tribunal
 may be removed from office on the grounds only of stated
 misbehaviour or of infirmity of mind or body by the votes
 of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the
 Regional House of Chiefs.
 (6) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 the House of Chiefs of a Region existing immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be
 deemed to have been established, from the coming into
 force of this Constitution as the House of Chiefs of the
 Region.
 181. For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression DENION
 "chief " means a person who, hailing from the appro- OF CHEF.
 priate family and lineage, has been validly nominated,
 elected, and enstooled, enskinned or installed as a chief or
 queen-mother in accordance with the requisite applicable
 customary law and usage.
 133
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY
 LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
 LOC    m    182. (1) For the purposes of local government in Ghana
 COUNCUS.  there shall be established by an Act of Parliament district
 and other local government councils.
 (2) The area of authority of a council established
 pursuant to clause (1) of this article shall be as determined
 by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (3) Subject to the provisions of this article, there
 shall be established village, town and area development
 committees by or under an Act of Parliament.
 (4) An Act enacted pursuant to clause (1) of the
 article shall provide-
 (a) for the holding of elections to such councils at
 intervals of not more than four years;
 (b) for the office of a clerk to the district or other
 local government council, who shall be res-
 ronsible to the council;
 (c) for the election by a council, of a chairman
 and a vice-chairman from among the members
 of the council;
 (d) for the functions and powers of the councils
 and committees referred to in this article
 including such powers as relate to education,
 health, housing, town and country planning,
 transport, agriculture, social welfare, public
 works, public utilities and such other functions
 as may be prescribed;
 (e) the levying of taxes, rates and duties; and
 (f) for the establishment by a council of a develop-
 ment fund for the purposes of the execution
 of public works and other public utilities or
 development projects within the area of autho-
 rity of the council.
 
 134
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 183. (1) A local government council established pursuant DITRICT
 to article 182 of this Constitution shall consist of-  ETC.
 (a) the member of Parliament within whose con-
 stituency falls the area of authority of any such
 council as ex officio member; and
 (b) such number of members as Parliament may,
 by or under an Act of Parliament, prescribe,
 (i) two-thirds of whom shall be elected in
 accordance with Regulations made
 in that behalf by the Electoral Com-
 missioner pursuant to clause (1) of
 article 38 of this Constitution; and
 (ii) one-third of whom shall be chosen by
 the traditional authorities in the dis-
 trict in accordance with traditional
 and customary usage.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and
 any other law, a district or other local government council
 shall be responsible-
 (a) for the administration of the area of its autho-
 rity in consultation, as appropriate, with the
 village, town or area committees in the area of
 its authority; and
 (b) for the performance of such other functions as
 Parliament may by law prescribe.
 (3) A district or other local government council
 may, subject to control by Parliament, levy such rates and
 taxes within its area of authority as may be approved by a
 resolution passed in that behalf by the council and
 supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the
 members of the council.
 (4) Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed
 to affect the allegiance owed under customary law and
 usage by a traditional authority or by a community imme-
 diately before the coming into force of this Constitution
 to any other traditional authority.
 
 135
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 184. (1) There shall be established within twelve months
 RANTS   after the coming into force of this Constitution a Local
 cOmMmON  Government Grants Commission to which the Government
 shall make available grants-in-aid to be allocated to regional
 councils and local government councils established by or
 under this Constitution.
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Local Government
 Grants Commission-
 (a) to determine the proportion of grants to be
 allocated to regional councils and the local
 government councils established by this Con-
 stitution; and
 (b) to make grants to the district and other local
 government councils
 (i) for specific projects approved  by
 Government;
 (ii) to fund projects considered to be of
 priority in the national development
 programme;
 (iii) to augment the income of a district
 or other local government council
 whose revenue and resources are
 inadequate;
 (iv) for such other purposes as Government
 may direct; and
 (c) to review at intervals of not more than three
 years grants made under paragraph (a) of
 this clause.
 (3) The Local Government Grants Commission
 shall consist of-
 (a) one representative of each regional council;
 (b) one representative of the ministry responsible
 for finance;
 (c) one representative of the ministry responsible
 for local government;
 (d) one representative of the National Association
 of Local Councils;
 
 136
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (e) one representative of the ministry responsible
 for economic planning; and
 (f) two other members appointed by the President
 acting in accordance with the advice of the
 Council of State.
 (4) The chairman of the Local Government Grants
 Commission shall enjoy the terms and conditions of service
 of a Justice of the Court of Appeal.
 (5) There shall be established a development fund
 out of which fund moneys shall be made available for the
 execution of projects undertaken by a local government
 council on behalf of the Government and for such other
 purposes as Parliament may prescribe.
 (6) The fund established under clause (5) of this
 article shall be under the management of the Local Govern-
 ment Grants Commission and shall consist of-
 (a) grants-in-aid by Government;
 (b) grants-in-aid by each corporation, enterprise
 or concern operating within the area of autho-
 rity of a district council;
 (c) levies imposed by Parliament on any such
 body as is referred to in paragraph (b) of this
 clause for the purposes of development; and
 (d) any other contribution in kind or in cash.
 (7) Moneys paid into the fund as grants-in-aid by
 any enterprise, corporation or concern referred to in para-
 graph (b) of clause (6) of this article in cash or in kind shall
 be an allowable deduction for the purposes of income tax.
 (8) Not less than fifteen per centum of the net
 revenue accruing to the Government from dues, rents,
 royalties or from the operatIons of any enterprise or under-
 taking of any person or body of persons howsoever
 described operating within the area of authority of a district
 council in respect of land or mineral resources shall be
 paid by the Government to that Council for the purposes of
 development in that area.
 
 137
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 REGIONAL   185. (1) There shall be established within six months after
 the coming into force of this Constitution a regional council
 in each Region which shall consist, subject to the provisions
 of clause (2) of this article, of-
 (a) two representatives each from the district or
 other local government councils in the Region;
 (b) not more than two chiefs from the House of
 Chiefs of the Region; and
 (c) the regional heads of the ministries in the
 Region as ex officio members who shall not
 have the right to vote on any matter for deci-
 sion before the regional council.
 (2) The chairman of the regional council shall be
 the Minister of State appointed for the Region under article
 186 of this Constitution.
 (3) A district or other local government council
 shall elect members to the regional council from among the
 members of the district or other local government council.
 (4) The functions of a regional council shall include-
 (a) the co-ordination of the development plans,
 programmes or other functions of the district
 councils in the Region;
 (b) planning at the regional level, and the super-
 vision and integration of ministerial or depart-
 mental programmes in the Region; and such
 functions of the Government as are perform-
 able at the regional level;
 (c) the elaboration and implementation of regional
 programmes for development including super-
 vision and control of the operation of any
 regional development corporation or authority;
 and
 (d) such other functions as may be assigned to it
 by Parliament.
 (5) A regional council shall have such administra-
 tive autonomy as is commensurate with the performance
 of its functions under this Constitution or any other law
 and with the subordination of those functions to the overall
 national needs.
 
 138
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 186. (1) The President shall, with the prior approval of m    or
 STATE FOR
 Parliament, appoint for each Region a Minister of State- THE
 (a) who shall represent the President in the Region; MGION.
 and
 (b) who shall be responsible for the co-ordination
 and direction of the administrative machinery
 in the Region.
 (2) The President may, in consultation with the
 Minister concerned, appoint for a Region a Deputy Minister
 to perform such functions as the President may determine.
 187. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, LOCAL
 Parliament may, by or under an Act of Parliament, provide LEGLUA'MON.
 for the performance of functions by the councils estab-
 lished under this Chapter.
 
 139
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
 LANDS
 Public Lands
 LAND AM     188. (1) All public lands in Ghana shall be vested in the
 OTHER     President on behalf of, and in trust for, the people of
 PUBuC     Ghana.
 PROPERTY.
 (2) For the purposes of this article, and subject to
 clause (3) of this article, the expression " public lands "
 includes any land which, immediately before the coming
 into force of this Constitution, was vested in the Govern-
 ment of Ghana in trust for, and on behalf of, the people
 of Ghana for the public service of Ghana, and any other
 land acquired in the public interest for the purposes of the
 Government of Ghana before, on or after that date.
 (3) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared
 that all lands in the Northern and Upper Regions of
 Ghana which immediately before the coming into force
 of this Constitution were vested in the Government of
 Ghana are not public lands within the meaning of clauses
 (1) and (2) of this article.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
 all lands referred to in clause (3) of this article shall vest in
 any such person who was the owner of any such land before
 any such vesting or in the appropriate skin without further
 assurance than this clause.
 (5) The provisions of clauses (3) and (4) of this article
 shall be without prejudice to the vesting by the Government
 in itself of any land which is required in the public interest
 for public purposes.
 Lands Commission
 THE ANDS    189. (1) There shall be established a Lands Commission
 comnIssION, which shall consist of-
 (a) a chairman, who shall not be a person who is
 a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister;
 
 140
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) a representative of the National House of
 Chiefs;
 (c) a representative of the Ghana Bar Association;
 (d) a representative of the Ghana Institution of
 Surveyors; and
 (e) not less than nine other members one each of
 whom shall at least come from each Region of
 Ghana.
 (2) An Act of Parliament enacted pursuant to clause
 (1) of this article shall provide for-
 (a) the creation of regional branches of the Com-
 mission; and
 (b) the execution of documents at the regional
 branches.
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment
 as a member of the Lands Commission unless he is
 qualified, at least, to be elected as a member of Parliament.
 (4) The office of the chairman or a member of the
 Lands Commission shall become vacant-
 (a) at the expiration of four years after his appoint-
 ment; or
 (b) if any circumstances arise that would cause
 him to be disqualified for appointment under
 clause (3) of this article; or
 (c) if he is removed from office by the President
 for inability to perform the functions of his
 office or for any other sufficient cause or for
 stated misbehaviour.
 (5) The Lands Commission shall hold and manage,
 to the exclusion of any other person or authority, any land
 or minerals vested in the President by this Constitution or
 any other law, or vested in the Commission by any law or
 acquired by the Government, and shall have such other
 functions in relation thereto as may be prescribed by or
 under an Act of Parliament.
 (6) The provisions of clause (5) of this article shall
 be without prejudice to the provisions of this Constitution
 
 141
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 and any other law relating to the compulsory acquisition
 or taking possession of any land, or mines, minerals,
 forests or national parks or reserves, or the tenure, use or
 management of land.
 (7) In the performance of any of its functions under
 this Constitution or any other law the Lands Commission
 shall be subject only to this Constitution and shall not be
 subject to the direction or control of any other person or
 authority.
 (8) No interest in, or right over, any land in Ghana
 shall be created which vests in a person who is not a citizen
 of Ghana a freehold interest in any land in Ghana; and
 accordingly an agreement, deed or conveyance of what-
 ever nature which seeks to confer any such interest in, or
 right over, any such land on a person who is not a citizen
 of Ghana shall be void and of no effect.
 (9) Where, on the twenty-second day of August, 1969,
 any person not being a citizen of Ghana had a freehold
 interest in, or right over, any land in Ghana, that interest or
 right shall be deemed to be a leasehold interest for a period
 of fifty years at a peppercorn rent commencing from the
 twenty-second day of August, 1969; and the freehold
 reversionary interest in any such land shall vest in the Presi-
 dent in trust for, and on behalf of, the people of Ghana.
 (10) No interest in, or right over, any land in Ghana
 shall be created which vests in a person who is not a citizen
 of Ghana a leasehold interest for a term of more than
 fifty years at any one time.
 (11) Where on the twenty-second day of August,
 1969, any person not being a citizen of Ghana had a leasehold
 interest in, or right over, any land in Ghana for an unexpired
 period of more than fifty years that interest in, or right over,
 any such land shall be deemed to be an interest or right
 subsisting for a period of fifty years commencing from the
 twenty-second day of August, 1969.
 (12) Where a person in whom is vested a leasehold
 interest in, or right over, any land by virtue of clause (9)
 of this article subsequently transfers his interest in that
 
 142
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 land.to a citizen of Ghana that citizen shall, in addition to
 the interest so transferred, be entitled, as of right, to acquire,
 for valuable consideration, the freehold reversionary interest
 in the land from the President in whom resides the rever-
 sionary interest vested under clause (9) of this article.
 (13) Where a person not being a citizen of Ghana has
 a leasehold interest in, or right over, any land vested in
 him by virtue of clause (11) of this article and subsequently
 transfers his interest in the land to a citizen of Ghana, the
 citizen to whom the interest is so transferred shall, in
 addition to the interest so transferred, be entitled, as of
 right, to the difference between the term of years to which
 the person not being a citizen of Ghana was entitled
 immediately before the twenty-second day of August, 1969
 and the fifty-year leasehold interest vested in him by the
 provisions of clause (11) of this article, subject, however,
 to the terms and conditions of the lease under which the
 person not being a citizen of Ghana originally acquired his
 interest in the land.
 (14) On the coming into force of this Constitution,
 any transaction, contract or undertaking involving the grant
 of a right or concession by or on behalf of any person includ-
 ing the Government of Ghana to any other person or body of
 persons howsoever described for the exploitation of any
 mineral, water or other natural resources of Ghana shall be
 subject to ratification by Parliament.
 Stool Lands
 190. (1) All stool lands in Ghana shall vest in the STOOL AND
 appropriate stool on behalf of, and in trust for, the subjects S" A
 of the stool.                                              PROPMTY
 (2) There shall be established the office of the
 Administrator of Stool Lands which shall be responsible-
 (a) for the establishment of a stool land account
 for each stool into which shall be paid all rents,
 dues, royalties, revenues or other payments
 whether in the nature of income or capital from
 the stool lands;
 143
 11
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) for the collection of all such rents, dues,
 royalties, revenues or other payments whether
 in the nature of income or capital, and to
 account for them to the beneficiaries specified
 under clause (5) of this article; and
 (c) for the disbursement of such revenues as may
 be determined pursuant to clauses (5) and (6)
 of this article.
 (3) An assurance of stool land to any person shall
 not operate to pass an interest in or right over a stool land
 unless the same shall have been executed with the consent
 and concurrence of the Lands Commission; and where the
 Commission fails or refuses to give any such consent and
 concurrence a person aggrieved by such failure or refusal
 may appeal to the High Court of Justice.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no
 interest in, or right over, any stool land in Ghana shall be
 created which vests in any person or body of persons
 howsoever described a freehold interest.
 (5) There shall be paid out of the stool lands account,
 (a) to the stool, through the traditional authority,
 for the maintenance of the stool in keeping with
 its status,
 (b) to the traditional authority, and
 (c) to the councils established pursuant to article
 182 of this Constitution,
 within whose area of authority are situate the stool lands
 concerned such moneys and in such proportions as may be
 determined by the Lands Commission.
 (6) Where a stool, traditional authority, or district
 or other local government council is dissatisfied with the
 apportionment determined by the Lands Commission it may
 appeal to the High Court of Justice which shall determine
 the issue taking into consideration the relative needs of the
 stool, the traditional authority or the council concerned.
 (7) For the purposes of this article the expression
 "stool " includes a " skin ".
 
 144
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 191. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, NATURAL
 Parliament shall, by or under an Act of Parliament, provide  "M
 for the establishment, within six months after the coming
 into force of this Constitution, of a Fisheries Commission, a
 Forestry Commission and such other Commissions as
 Parliament may determine which shall be responsible for the
 regulation and management of the utilisation of the natural
 resources concerned, and the co-ordination of the policies
 in relation thereto.
 145
 11 .A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
 THE PRESS COMMISSION
 ESTABLISH- 192. (1) There shall be established, within six months
 MENT OF THU    h           noo               ,,htn         rs
 PRES COM- after.-the coming into force of this Constitution, a Press
 MssION.   Commission which shall consist of-
 (a) one representative each nominated by-
 (i) the Association of Recognised Profes-
 sional Bodies;
 (ii) the Ghana Bar Association;
 (iii) the National Development Commission;
 (iv) the Ghana National Association   of
 Teachers;
 (v) the Universities of Ghana;
 (vi) the Ghana Association of Writers;
 (vii) the owners and the proprietors of the
 private press;
 (viii) the Christian Council and the National
 Catholic Secretariat;
 (b) two representatives nominated by the Ghana
 Journalists' Association; and
 (c) two other members one of whom shall be a
 woman.
 (2) Where the chairman of the Press Commission
 dies, resigns, is removed from office or is absent from
 Ghana, or is by reason of illness unable to perform the
 functions of his office, the members of the Press Commis-
 sion shall elect one of their number to act as chairman of
 the Commission until such time as the chairman is able to
 perform the functions of his office or until a new chairman
 is elected.
 (3) In the performance of any of its functions the
 Press Commission shall be subject only to this Constitution
 and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any
 other person or authority.
 
 146
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (4) The appointment of officers or other employees
 of the Press Commission shall be made by the chairman of
 the Press Commission acting in consultation with the
 Public Services Commission.
 (5) The administrative expenses of the Press Com-
 mission including all salaries, allowances and pensions
 payable to or in respect of persons serving with the Com-
 mission shall be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.
 193. The functions of the Press Commission shall FUNCTONs
 *  l   eOF THE PRESS
 meclude-                                                COMISSION.
 (a) the appointment of the chairman and other
 members of the governing body of any public
 corporation established for sound or television
 broadcasting, the press or other media of mass
 communication or information;
 (b) the assistance, where necessary, in the procure-
 ment and distribution on an equitable and
 non-discriminatory basis of the facilities and
 services required for the efficient and indepen-
 dent operation of the press and other media for
 mass communication or information;
 (c) the making, by constitutional instrument, of
 Regulations for the registration of newspapers
 and other publications;
 (d) the making, by constitutional instrument, of
 Regulations for the registration and licensing
 of other media for mass communication;
 (e) the taking of measures to ensure the preserva-
 tion of press freedom; and
 (f) the taking of measures to ensure the main-
 tenance of the highest professional and journal-
 istic standards in the mass media including the
 investigation and adjudication of complaints
 made against members of the press.
 194. Subject to the provisions of article 193 of this INDEPEN-
 Constitution, the Press Commission shall not exercise or DENE
 purport to exercise any control or direction over the profes-
 sional functions of a person engaged in the production of
 newspapers or other means of mass communication.
 
 147
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 ROHnONa    195. Subject to the provisions of article 193 of this
 OF PRES
 MCENCEs. Constitution, Parliament shall have no power to enact an
 Act requiring or authorising any authority to require a person
 to obtain or maintain a licence of any kind for the establish-
 ment or operation of a newspaper, publication or institution
 of the press or other media for mass communication or
 information.
 
 148
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
 COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY
 196. (1) Except as otherwise provided in clause (3) of mmnom
 article 5 of this Constitution, the President shall, by consti- commsu
 tutional instrument, appoint a commission of inquiry into o nar.
 any matter of public interest where-
 (a) the President is satisfied that there should be
 appointed a commission of inquiry; or
 (b) the Council of State advises that it is in the
 public interest so to do; or
 (c) Parliament, by a resolution passed in that be-
 half, requests that a commission be appointed
 to inquire into any matter specified in the re-
 solution as being a matter of public importance.
 (2) A commission appointed under clause (1) of this
 article may consist of a sole commissioner or two or more
 persons one of whom shall be appointed the chairman of
 the commission.
 (3) No person shall be appointed a sole commis-
 sioner or the chairman of a commission of inquiry under
 this article unless-
 (a) he is a Justice of the Superior Court of Judica-
 ture; or
 (b) he is a person qualified to be appointed a
 Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature; or
 (c) he is a person who has held office as a Justice
 of the Superior Court of Judicature; or
 (d) he is a person who possesses special qualifica-
 tions or knowledge in respect of the matter
 forming the subject-matter of the investigation.
 (4) Subject to the provisions of clause (3) of this
 article, where a commission of inquiry appointed under
 clause (1) of this article consists of more than two commis-
 sioners, other than the chairman, at least one of them shall
 
 149
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 be a person who possesses special qualifications or know-
 ledge in respect. of the matter forming the subject-matter of
 the investigation.
 POWERS OF. 197. (1)A commission of inquiry shall have such powers,
 COMMISSION  17   1     omsino       nur     hl   aesc      oes
 OF INQURY. rights and privileges as are vested in the High Court of
 Justice or a Justice thereof at a trial, in respect of-
 (a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and
 examining them on oath, affirmation or other-
 wise; and
 (b) compelling the production of documents; and
 (c) the issue of a commission or request to examine
 witnesses abroad.
 (2) A sole commissioner or a member of a commis-
 sion of inquiry shall not be liable to any action or suit in
 respect of any matter or thing done by him in the perform-
 ance of his functions as such commissioner or member.
 FUNCONS     198. (1) A commission of inquiry shall-
 OF
 COMMssION         (a) make a full, faithful and an impartial inquiry
 OF INQUIRY.          into any matter specified in the commission
 of appointment; and
 (b) report in writing the result of the inquiry; and
 (c) furnish in the report the reasons leading to the
 conclusions arrived at or reported.
 (2) Where a commission of inquiry makes an adverse
 finding against any person, the report of the commission of
 inquiry shall, for the purposes of this'. Constitution, be
 deemed to be a judgment of the High Court of Justice
 and accordingly an appeal shall lie as of right from the
 commission to the Court of Appeal.
 (3) The President shall, subject to the provisions of
 clause (4) of this article, cause to be published the report of
 a commission of inquiry together with the white paper
 thereon within six months of the date of the submission of
 the report by the commission.
 (4) Where the report of a commission of inquiry is
 not to be published the President shall issue a statement
 to that effect giving reasons why the report is not to, 'be
 published.
 
 150
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 199. (1) Except as may be otherwise ordered by the com- INQMY.
 mission in the interest of public morality, public safety or PROCEDURE
 public order, the proceedings of a commission of inquiry
 shall be held in public.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the
 Rules of Court Committee established under article 133
 of this Constitution shall, by constitutional instrument,
 make Rules regulating the practice and procedure of all
 commissions of inquiry and for appeals therefrom.
 
 151
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
 CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PUBLIC OFFICERS
 CONFLCT OF  200. A public officer shall not put himself in a position
 INTERlET,  where his personal interest conflicts or is likely to conflict
 with the performance of the functions of his office.
 OTHER 201. (1) A public officer shall not-
 PUBLIC
 mPonqr-          (a) receive in respect of his services on the govern-
 METS.                ing bodies of more than one public cor-
 poration, the allowances in respect of more
 than one such service;
 (b) receive or be paid the emoluments of any
 other public office at the same time as he
 receives or is paid the emoluments of a public
 office; or
 (c) engage or participate in the management or
 running of a private business, profession or
 trade.
 (2) No person shall be appointed or act as the
 chairman of the governing body of a public corporation
 or authority while holding any other position in the service
 of that corporation or authority.
 R I       202. (1) A public officer shall not ask for, nor accept,
 IGND.     a property or benefit of any kind for himself or any other
 person on account of anything done, or to be done or
 omitted to be. done by him in the performance of -his
 functions.
 (2) A gift or donation to a public officer on a
 public or ceremonial occasion shall be treated as a gift to
 the appropriate institution represented by the public officer
 and shall be used as such.
 (3) The receipt by a public officer of a gift or benefit
 from a commercial firm, business enterprise or any other
 person who has entered into contract or is likely to enter
 into a contract, or enters into a contract with the Govern-
 ment shall be presumed to have been received in contraven-
 tion of clause (1) of this article.
 
 152
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 203. No person shall offer a public officer any property, IMcY OF
 gift or benefit of any kind as an inducement for the grant- OPCS.
 ing of a favour or the performance of a function of the
 public officer.
 204. A public officer shall not, without lawful excuse, ABusE o,
 do or direct to be done, an act which is prejudicial to the
 rights of any other person.
 205. (1) A person who holds a public office mentioned DE ARA-
 in clause (5) of this article shall submit to the Auditor- AMSa.
 General, a written declaration of all property or assets
 owned by, or liabilities owed by, him and his spouse whether
 directly or indirectly,
 (a) within three months after the coming into
 force of this Constitution or after taking office,
 as the case may be;
 (b) at the end of every two years; and
 (c) at the end of his term of office.
 (2) A false statement in such declaration shall be
 a contravention of this Constitution.
 (3) The declaration made under clause (1) of this
 article shall, on demand, be produced in evidence-
 (a) before a court of competent jurisdiction;
 (b) before a commission of inquiry established
 under article 196 of this Constitution;
 (c) before an investigator appointed by the
 Ombudsman under clause (1) of article 207.
 (4) Any property or assets acquired by a public
 officer after the initial declaration required by clause (1)
 of this article and which is not reasonably attributable to
 income, gift, loan, inheritance or any other reasonable
 source shall be deemed to have been acquired in contra-
 vention of this Constitution.
 (5) A public office to which the provisions of this
 article apply shall be the office of-
 (a) the President of the Republic;
 (b) the Vice-President of the Republic;
 
 153
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (c) the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and a member
 of Parliament;
 (d) Minister of State or Deputy Minister;
 (e) Chief Justice, Justice of the Superior Court of
 Judicature, the Ombudsman and all judicial
 offices;
 (f) Ambassador or High Commissioner;
 (g) Secretary to the Cabinet;
 (h) Head of ministry or government department
 or equivalent office in the Civil Service;
 (i) member of the Audit Service of the rank of
 Principal Auditor and above;
 (j) Clerk to Parliament;
 (k) member of the Ghana Police Service of the rank
 of Assistant Commissioner and above;
 (1) member of the Armed Forces of Ghana of the
 rank of Lieutenant-Colonel or equivalent rank
 and above;
 (m) member of the Prisons Service of the rank of
 Assistant Director and above;
 (n) chairman and a clerk to the council of a local
 government council;
 (o) executive chairman, managing director, general
 manager and departmental head of a public
 corporation or company in which the State has
 a controlling interest;
 (p) Vice-Chancellor, registrar, bursar, finance
 officer, head or director of a school or an
 institute of a university, or head or director,
 assistant director, bursar or finance officer of a
 school or institution, financed out of public
 funds;
 (q) member or chairman of a commission, other
 than a commission of inquiry, established by
 or under the authority of this Constitution; and
 (r) such posts in the public service as Parliament
 may prescribe.
 
 154
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (6) The Auditor-General shall make a written
 declaration of his assets and liabilities to the President in
 the manner and subject to the conditions provided in
 clauses (1) to (3) of this article.
 (7) Before entering upon the duties of his office, a
 person appointed to an office to which the provisions of
 this article apply, shall take and subscribe the oath of
 allegiance, the oath of secrecy and the official oath set out
 in the Second Schedule to this Constitution, or any other
 oath appropriate to his office.
 206. (1) Before entering upon the duties of his office MANAGING
 9 ASSET OF
 the public trustee shall take over as a trustee for, and on reme
 behalf of, a person appointed full time to an office to which OFFCERS.
 the provisions of article 205 of this Constitution apply, and
 for the period during which that person continues to hold
 such public office-
 (a) the interests of that person in any business,
 trade or undertaking; and
 (b) any business, trade or undertaking solely owned
 by that person.
 (2) Pursuant to clause (1) of this article, compensa-
 tion shall be paid, as the result of the mismanagement
 of the public trustee which has resulted in a loss to any
 person whose interest, business, trade or undertaking is
 taken over by the public trustee.
 207. (1) An allegation that a public officer has contra- O As
 vened or has not complied with a provision of this Chapter VENTON.
 shall be made to the Ombudsman, who shall, unless
 the person concerned makes a written admission of the
 contravention or non-compliance, cause the matter to be
 investigated.
 (2) The Ombudsman may take such action as he
 considers appropriate on the results of such investigation
 or on such admission.
 208. A public officer who does an act prohibited by this AGENIS,
 Chapter through a nominee, trustee, or other agent shall be
 deemed ipso facto to have contravened this Constitution.
 
 155
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 INTN"RTA-  209. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise
 requires,
 "business " includes a profession, vocation, trade
 and any venture or concern in the nature of
 trade;
 "emolument " includes salary, overtime or leave
 pay, commission, fee, bonus, gratuity, benefit,
 advantage, whether or not that advantage
 is capable of being turned into money or
 money's worth, given or granted in respect
 of any employment or office;
 "public officer" means a person who holds a
 public office.
 
 156
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
 AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION
 210. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parlia- A
 ment may, by an Act of Parliament, amend any provision c"n.
 of this Constitution.                                now.
 (2) No provision of this Constitution shall be
 amended or deemed to have been amended by an Act of
 Parliament or altered whether directly or indirectly by an
 Act of Parliament, unless that Act of Parliament shall have
 been enacted in accordance with the relevant provisions of
 this article.
 (3) A bill for an Act of Parliament to amend a
 provision of this Constitution, other than any of the provi-
 sions enumerated in clause (4) of this article, shall not be
 passed in Parliament unless-
 (a) the proposal for the bill has been debated in
 Parliament and accepted by a resolution passed
 in that behalf by Parliament; and
 (b) the proposal and the bill for the amendment
 have been published in the Gazette by the
 Speaker for a period of not less than six
 months immediately preceding the introduc-
 tion of the bill in Parliament; and
 (c) the proposal and the bill for the amendment
 have been debated in each district, or other
 local government council and accepted, not
 later than six months after the introduction
 of the bill in Parliament, by resolution, on a
 secret ballot, of not less than two-thirds of the
 total number of such Councils; and
 (d) the bill which seeks to effect the amendment has
 been approved by a resolution of the Council
 of State passed in that behalf and supported,
 not less than six months after the introduction
 of the bill in Parliament, on a secret ballot,
 by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all
 the members of the Council; and
 
 157
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (e) the bill which seeks to effect the amendment
 contained in the proposal has been approved
 by a resolution of Parliament passed in that
 behalf and supported, at the end of the second
 and final debates on a secret ballot, by the
 votes of not less than two-thirds of all the mem-
 bers of Parliament during the life of that Parlia-
 ment.
 (4) A bill for an Act of Parliament to amend this
 article and articles, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 36, 37, 40, 75, 110 to 114
 inclusive, 128, 138, 151, 167, 177, 181, 182, 183, 192 to 195
 inclusive; 205, 211 and 217 and the provisions of Chapters
 Four, Six and Eight of this Constitution shall not be intro-
 duced in Parliament unless the proposal for the bill has been
 approved in a referendum to which the provisions of
 clause (2) of article 38 of this Constitution shall apply.
 (5) Parliament shall enact an Act of Parliament to
 give effect to an approval given pursuant to clause (4) of
 this article.
 (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (6)
 to (12) of article 88 of this Constitution, the President shall
 not assent to a bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any
 provision of this Constitution unless-
 (a) the bill is expressed to be a bill for an Act to
 amend the Constitution and only the Constitu-
 tion; and
 (b) the bill is accompanied by a certificate-
 (i) from the Speaker that the provisions
 of paragraphs (a), (b) and (e) of clause
 (3) of this article have been complied
 with;
 (ii) by the chairman of the Council of
 State to the effect that the provisions
 of paragraph (d) of clause (3) of this
 article have been complied with;
 (iii) from the Electoral Commissioner to
 the effect that the provisions of para-
 graph (c) of clause (3) or of clause (4)
 of this article, as the case may be,
 have been complied with.
 
 158
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 CHAwrB TWENTY-SIX
 MISCELLANEOUS
 211. (1) Where a person has a claim against the Government aA
 that claim may be enforced as of right by proceedings taken .
 against the Government for that purpose without the grant
 of a fiat or the use of the process known as petition of right.
 (2) The Government shall be subject to all those
 liabilities in tort to which, if it were a private person of full
 age and capacity, it would be subject-
 (a) in respect of torts committed by its employees
 or agents; and
 (b) in respect of a breach of those duties which
 a person owes to his employees or agents at
 common law or under any other law by reason
 of being their employer; and
 (c) in respect of a breach of the duties attaching
 at common law or under any other law to the
 ownership, occupation, possession or control
 of property.
 (3) No proceedings shall lie against the Govern-
 ment by virtue of the provisions of paragraph (a) of clause
 (2) of this article in respect of an act or omission of an
 employee or agent of the Government unless the act or
 omission would, apart from the provisions of this article,
 have given rise to a cause of action in tort against that
 employee or his estate.
 (4) Where the Government is bound by a statutory
 duty which is binding also upon persons other than the
 Government and its officers, the Government shall, in
 respect of a failure to comply with that duty, be subject
 to all those liabilities in tort which it would be so subject
 if the Government were a private person of full age and
 capacity.
 (5) Where any functions are conferred or imposed
 upon an officer of the Government as such either by a
 rule of the common law or by statute and that officer
 commits a tort while performing or purporting to perform
 159
 12
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 those functions, the liabilities of the Government in respect
 of the tort shall be such as they would have been if those
 functions had been conferred or imposed solely by virtue
 of instructions lawfully given by the Government.
 (6) No proceedings shall lie against the Govern-
 ment by virtue of the provisions of this article in respect of-
 (a) anything done or omitted to be done by any
 person while discharging or purporting to dis-
 charge any responsibilities of a judicial nature
 vested in him; or
 (b) any act, neglect or default of an officer of the
 Government unless that officer-
 (i) has been directly or indirectly appoin-
 ted by the Government and was, at
 the material time, paid in respect of
 his duties as officer of the Govern-
 meit wholly out of public funds or
 moneys provided by Parliament; or
 (ii) was, at the material time, holding
 an office in respect of which the
 Public Services Commission certifies
 that the holder thereof would norm-
 ally be so paid.
 (7) Where the Government is subject to a liability
 by virtue of the provisions of this article, the law relating
 to indemnity and contribution shall be enforceable-
 (a) against the Government by an employee thereof
 acting in the proper execution of his duties in
 respect of the liability to which it is so subject
 or by any other person in respect of the liabi-
 lity to which he is so subject;
 (b) by the Government against any person, other
 than an employee of the Government, in
 respect of the liability to which it is so subject,
 as if the Government were a private person of full age and
 capacity.
 LBOAL AID.  212. (1) For the purposes of enforcing any provision of
 this Constitution, a person shall have legal aid in connection
 
 160
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 with any proceedings relating thereto if he has reasonable
 grounds for taking, defending, prosecuting or being a party
 thereto.
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parlia-
 ment shall, by or under an Act of Parliament, prescribe-
 (a) the conditions of legal aid;
 (b) the assessment of disposable capital or income
 or property for the purposes of contributions
 towards legal aid;
 (c) the right to and the nature of legal advice;
 (d) the composition and functions of advisory
 committees; and
 (e) generally for the purposes of giving effect to
 the provisions of this article.
 (3) In addition to the preceding provisions of this
 article, Parliament may, by or under an Act of Parliament,
 provide for the granting of legal aid in such matters, other
 than those referred to in clause (1) of this article, as may be
 prescribed therein.
 (4) For the purposes of this article, legal aid shall
 consist of representation by a legal practitioner, including
 all such assistance as is given by a legal practitioner, in
 the steps preliminary or incidental to any proceedings or
 arriving at or giving effect to a compromise to avoid or to
 bring an end to any proceedings.
 213. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context other- INTERPRETA-
 wise requires-                                           TON.
 "Act of Parliament " means an Act enacted by
 Parliament;
 "article " means an article of this Constitution;
 "Civil Service " includes service in both central
 and local governments;
 " commission of inquiry " includes a committee
 of inquiry;
 constitutional instrument " means an instru-
 ment made under a power conferred in that
 behalf by this Constitution;
 "counsel " includes a legal practitioner;
 161
 12A
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 "Court " means a Court of competent jurisdic-
 tion established by or under the authority of
 this Constitution;
 "Decree " includes a Decree made by the
 National Liberation Council, the National
 Redemption Council or the Supreme Military
 Council or the Armed Forces Revolutionary
 Council or under its authority and any statu-
 tory instrument made under the authority of
 any such Decree;
 .&enactment " means an Act of Parliament or
 Decree or a constitutional instrument or a
 statutory instrument or any provision of an
 Act of Parliament or Decree or of a consti-
 tutional or of a statutory instrument;
 "functions " includes powers and duties;
 "Government " means any authority by which the
 executive authority of Ghana is duly exercised;
 "judgment" includes an order or decree of the
 Court;
 "meeting " includes a period during which Par-
 liament is meeting continually within a
 session;
 "Minister " means a Minister appointed under
 article 63 of this Constitution;
 "oath " includes an affirmation;
 "oath of allegiance " means the oath of alle-
 giance specified in the Second Schedule to this
 Constitution;
 " paramount chief " means a person. who has
 been nominated, elected and installed as such
 in accordance with customary law and usage;
 " public corporation " means a corporation or
 any other body of persons established by an
 Act of Parliament or set up out of funds pro-
 vided'by Parliament or other public funds;
 
 162
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 "public interest " includes any right or advan-
 tage which enures or is intended to enure
 for the benefit generally of the whole of the
 people of Ghana;
 "public office" includes an office the emoluments
 attaching to which are paid directly from the
 Consolidated Fund or directly out of moneys
 provided by Parliament and an office in a
 public corporation established entirely out of
 public funds or moneys provided by Parlia-
 ment;
 "public service " includes service in any civil
 office of Government, the emoluments attach-
 ing to which are paid directly from the Con-
 solidated Fund or directly out of moneys
 provided by Parliament and service with a
 public corporation;
 "retiring awards " includes pension and gratuity;
 "Rules of Court Committee " means the Rules
 of Court Committee established by article 133
 of this Constitution;
 "session " means a series of meetings of Parlia-
 ment within a period of twelve months;
 "sitting " includes a period during which Parlia-
 ment is sitting continuously without adjourn-
 ment and a period during which it is in
 committee;
 "statutory instrument" means an instrument
 made, whether directly or indirectly, under a
 power conferred by an Act of Parliament;
 "stool land " includes any land or interest in, or
 right over, any land controlled by a stool,
 the head of a particular community or a
 family for the benefit of subjects of that stool
 or the members of that community or family;
 "stool " includes a skin and the person or body
 of persons having control over skin or family
 land.
 "treason " means treason as defined in clause (16)
 of article 26 of this Constitution.
 
 163
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (2) In this Constitution and in any other law,
 (a) a reference to the holder of an office by the
 term designating his office, unless the context
 otherwise requires, shall be construed as includ-
 ing a reference to a person for the time being
 lawfully acting in, or performing the functions
 of, that office;
 (b) references to the power to remove a public
 officer from his office shall be construed,
 subject to the provisions of clause (4) of this
 article, as including references to a power
 conferred by any law to require or permit that
 officer to retire from the public service.
 (3) Nothing in paragraph (b) of clause (2) of this
 article shall be construed as conferring on any person or
 authority power to require a Justice of the Superior Court
 of Judicature or the Auditor-General to retire from the
 public services.
 (4) A power conferred by a law to permit a per-
 son to retire from the public services shall, in the case
 of a public officer who may be removed from office by
 some person or authority, other than a commission estab-
 lished by this Constitution, vest in the President acting
 in accordance with the advice of the appropriate authority.
 (5) For the purposes of this Constitution and any
 other law, a person shall not be considered as holding a
 public office by reason only of the fact that he is in receipt
 of a pension or other like allowance in respect of service
 under the Government of Ghana.
 (6) A provision in this Constitution that vests
 in any person or authority power to remove a public
 officer from his office shall be without prejudice to the power
 of any person or authority to abolish any cffice or to any
 law for compulsory retirement of public officers generally
 or any class of public officer on attaining the age specified
 therein.
 (7) Where power is vested by this Constitution in
 any person or authority to appoint a person to act in or
 perform the functions of an office if the holder thereof is
 
 164
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 himself unable to perform those functions, no such appoint-
 ment shall be called in question on the ground that the
 holder of the office was unable to perform those functions.
 (8) No provision of this Constitution or of any
 other law that any person or authority shall not be subject
 to the direction or control of any other person or authority
 in the performance of any functions under this Constitution
 or that other law shall be construed as precluding a Court
 from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question
 whether that person or authority has performed those func-
 tions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.
 (9) In this Constitution references to the alteration
 of any of the provisions of this Constitution or of an Act
 of Parliament include references to the amendment, modifi-
 cation, re-enactment with amendment or modification, the
 suspension or repeal of that provision and the making of a
 different provision in lieu of that provision.
 214. Where in this Constitution or in any other law EXERCm op
 discretionary power is vested in any person or authority,  DE
 (a) that discretionary power shall be deemed to POWER,
 imply a duty to be fair and candid;
 (b) the exercise of any such discretionary power
 shall not be arbitrary, capricious or biased
 either by resentment, prejudice or personal
 dislike and shall be in accordance with due
 process of law; and
 (c) the person or authority, not being a judge or
 other judicial officer in the exercise of his
 judicial functions, in whom the discretionary
 power is vested shall, by constitutional or
 statutory instrument, as the case may be, make
 and publish Regulations, not being incon-
 sistent with any provision of this Constitu-
 tion or of that other law, which shall govern
 the exercise of that discretionary power.
 215. In this Constitution and in any other law,
 (a) the power to appoint a person to hold or to
 act in an office in the public services shall
 
 165
 
 
 The ConstitIon
 
 include the power to confirm appointments,
 to exercise disciplinary control over persons
 holding or acting in such offices and to remove
 such persons from office;
 (b) where a power is conferred or a duty is
 imposed, the power may be exercised and the
 duty shall be performed, from time to time, as
 occasion requires;
 (c) where a power is given to any person or
 authority to do or enforce the doing of an act
 or a thing, all such powers shall be deemed to
 be also given as are necessary to enable that
 person or authority to do or enforce the doing
 of the act or thing;
 (d) where a power is conferred to make any
 constitutional or statutory instrument, regula-
 tions or rules or pass any resolution or give
 any direction, the power shall be construed
 as including the power, exercisable in like
 manner, to amend or to revoke such constitu-
 tional or statutory instrument, regulations or
 rules or resolution or direction as the case may
 be;
 (e) words importing male persons shall include
 female persons and corporations;
 (f) words in the singular shall include the plural,
 and words in the plural shall include the
 singular;
 (g) where a word is defined, other parts of speech
 and tenses of that word shall have correspond-
 ing meanings;
 (h) words directing or empowering a public officer
 to do any act or thing, or otherwise applying
 to him by the designation of his office, shall
 include his successors -in office and all his
 deputies or all other assistants;
 (i) words directing or empowering a Minister of
 State to do an act or a thing, or otherwise
 applying to him by the designation of his
 office, shall include a person acting for him,
 
 166
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 or if the office is vacant a person designated to
 act in that office by or under the authority
 of an Act of Parliament and also his successors
 in office or all his deputies or other assistants;
 (j) where a power is conferred or a duty is imposed
 on the holder of an office as such, the power
 may be exercised and the duty shall be
 performed by the person for the time being
 charged with the performance of the functions
 of his office.
 216. Subject to the provisions of article 210 of this mauAL
 Constitution, where on any matter, whether arising out o" "
 of this Constitution or otherwise, there is no provision,
 express or by necessary implication, of this Constitution
 which deals with the matter that has arisen, Parliament
 shall, by an Act of Parliament, not being inconsistent with
 any provision of this Constitution, provide for that matter
 to be dealt with.
 217. The transitional provisions specified in the First    sowN
 Schedule to this Constitution shall have effect notwith- PROVISIOms.
 standing anything to the contrary contained in this Con-
 stitution.
 
 167
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 FIRST SCHEDULE
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 PART I
 FIRST PRESIDENT
 ans          1. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
 PRBSIDT. tained in this Constitution, the person duly elected President
 of Ghana under the law in force immediately before the
 coming into force of this Constitution shall be deemed to
 have been duly elected for the purposes of this Constitution.
 (2) The said President shall assume office as President
 on the date of the coming into force of this Constitution
 notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
 Constitution.
 PART II
 FIRST PARLIAMENT
 2. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary con-
 PRIW     tained in this Constitution, the persons duly elected as
 members of Parliament under the law in force immediately
 before the coming into force of this Constitution shall be
 deemed to have been duly elected members of Parliament
 for the purposes of this Constitution.
 (2) The person who was Clerk of the Constituent
 Assembly established under the Constituent Assembly
 Decree, 1978 (S.M.C.D. 203) or such other public officer
 as the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council may designate
 shall, not later than seven days after the coming into force
 of this Constitution, summon a meeting of Parliament for
 the election of the Speaker, the taking of oaths by members
 of Parliament, the swearing in of the President and the
 approval of Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers for
 appointment under this Constitution.
 (3) The person who was Clerk of the said Constituent
 Assembly or such person as is designated under subsection
 (2) of this section shall, notwithstanding anything to the
 
 168
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 contrary contained in this Constitution, act as Clerk to
 Parliament until a Clerk is appointed under article 105 of
 this Constitution.
 (4) For the avoidance of doubt any notice given
 before the coming into force of this Constitution summoning
 Parliament to meet for the purpose of subsection (2) of this
 section shall be deemed to be a valid notice for all purposes.
 PART III
 THE JUDICIARY
 3. (1) The required number of Justices for a duly con- Fmno s
 stituted Supreme Court as established under clause (5) of COURT, ETC.
 article 114 of this Constitution shall be appointed within
 twelve months after the coming into force of this Constitu-
 tion, and until the appointments are made, the Court of
 Appeal as established under that clause shall perform
 the functions of the Supreme Court contained in articles
 51, 117 and 118 only of this Constitution.
 (2) A Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature,
 other than one who retires from the public service pursuant
 to subsection (3) of this section, on retiring from office as
 such Justice,
 (a) shall, in addition to any gratuity payable to
 him, be paid a pension which is equivalent
 - to the salary paid to a Justice of a Superior
 Court of Judicature under the provisions of
 article 58 of this Constitution in any case in
 which that Justice has served as such Justice
 for a period of ten years or more; and
 (b) shall not hold any private office of profit or
 emolument either directly or indirectly.
 (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2)
 of this section, a Justice of the Superior Court of Judicature
 may,
 (a) at any time on the completion of twenty years'
 service in the public service at least ten con-
 tinuous years of which are in respect of service
 as such Justice, and
 
 169
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) before attaining the age of sixty years,
 retire from office and shall be entitled on such retirement to
 a gratuity and pension for the time being applicable to the
 public service.
 (4) The provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this
 section shall apply only to a Justice of the Superior Court of
 Judicature who, immediately before the coming into force
 of this Constitution, was holding office as such Justice;
 and shall not apply to any person who is appointed as such
 Justice after the coming into force of this Constitution.
 CAM          4. All proceedings pending before any court immedia-
 PENDING  tely before the coming into force of this Constitution may
 COURTS.  be proceeded with and completed in that court notwith-
 standing anything to the contrary contained in this Consti-
 tution.
 REVIEWS      5. Any review pending before the full bench of the Court
 DEPORE FULL of Appeal immediately before the coming into force of this
 BENCH OF  Constitution shall, subject to section 3 of this Schedule, be
 AEAL     deemed to be an appeal pending before the Supreme Court.
 PETITIONs    6. All petitions pending before the Commissions and
 BEFORE   Committees of Inquiry (Findings) Review Tribunal imme-
 REVIEW   diately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall
 be transferred to the Court of Appeal and shall thereafter
 be treated as if they were appeals before that Court.
 PART IV
 MISCELLANEOUS
 an~o         7. (1) A person who immediately before the coming
 'FCBS,   into force of this Constitution held or was acting in an office
 in existence immediately before the coming into force of this
 Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed as far
 as is consistent with the provisions of this Constitution to
 hold or to act in the equivalent office under this Constitution.
 (2) A person who before the coming into force of
 this Constitution would have been required under the law
 in force to vacate his office at the expiration of a period of
 
 170
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 service shall, notwithstanding the provisions of su*bsection
 (1) of this section, vacate his office at the expiration of that
 period.
 (3) The provisions of this section shall be without
 prejudice to any powers conferred by or under this Con-
 stitution or any othur law not being inconsistent with any
 provision of this Constitution, upon any person or authority
 to make provision for the abolition of office, for the removal
 from office of persons holding or acting in any office and
 for requiring those persons to retire from office.
 (4) In determining, for the purposes of any law
 relating to retiring benefits or otherwise to length of service,
 the length of service of a public officer to whom the provi-
 sions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section apply, service
 as a public officer under the Government which terminates
 immediately before the coming into force of this Constitu-
 tion shall be deemed to be continuous with service as a
 public officer which begins immediately at such commence-
 ment.
 (5) A person to whom the provisions of this section
 apply shall, immediately on the coming into force of this
 Constitution or at any convenient time thereafter, take and
 subscribe the oath required for that office by law.
 (6) A person who was entitled to retire on his salary
 immediately before the coming into force of this Consti-
 tution shall have the same terms and conditions of service
 relating to retiring awards as he enjoyed immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution; and accordingly
 nothing in this Constitution or in this Schedule shall adver-
 sely affect the conditions of service of any such person.
 8. Subject to subsection (1) of section 7 of this Schedule CEROAIN
 the first appointments of the persons referred to in article 57 MENTS TO B
 of this Constitution shall be made within six months after  mnw
 the coming into force of this Constitution.               AFMR COM-
 MENCMENT
 OF CONSTITUj
 TION.
 9. Until provision is otherwise made by Parliament BORDER
 the Border Guards shall continue to be part of the Armed GUARDS.
 Forces of Ghana.
 
 171
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 ECOXISONS     10. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Con-
 AND stitution to the contrary, any commission or committee of
 COMMrrTEES inquiry in existence immediately before the coming into force
 OF INQUIRY. of this Constitution may continue in existence until the sub-
 mission of its report or until it is otherwise dissolved in
 accordance with law.
 REPORTS AND   11. For the removal of doubt, the report and findings
 FINDINGS OF
 COMMISSIONS of a commission or committee of inquiry established
 AND      before the coming into force of this Constitution under any
 OFINQUIY. enactment shall have the same effect as the report or find-
 irigs of a commission of inquiry established under this
 Constitution.
 PENDING       12. Where any matter or thing has been commenced
 MATrjRs. before the coming into force of this Constitution by a person
 or authority having power in that behalf under the existing
 law, that matter or thing may be carried on and completed
 by the person or authority having power in that behalf on or
 after such commencement and it shall not be necessary for
 any such person or authority to commence any such matter
 or thing de novo.
 S POESIO    13. (1) Subject to the provisions of articles 188 and
 189 of this Constitution, all property and all assets which
 immediately before the coming into force of this Consti-
 tution were vested in any authority or person for the pur-
 poses of, or in right of, the Government of Ghana or in
 the Government of Ghana shall, on the coming into force
 of this Constitution, without further assurance than this
 section, vest in the Lands Commission or the Government
 of Ghana under this Constitution as the case may be.
 (2) A property which was liable immediately before
 the coming into force of this Constitution, to estreat or to
 be forfeited to the Government of Ghana shall, on such com-
 mencement, be liable to estreat or to be forfeited to the
 Government of Ghana under this Constitution.
 (3) Where immediately before the coming into
 force of this Constitution any person held any property or
 assets in trust,
 (a) for the President of Ghana under the Consti-
 tution that was suspended on the thirteenth
 day of January, 1972.or
 
 172
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (b) for the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
 or the Government of Ghana,
 for the purposes of, or in right of, the Government of Ghana,
 that person shall, on the coming into force of this Consti-
 tution, hold such property or assets subject to the provisions
 of articles 188 and 189 of this Constitution, on the like
 trust for the Government of Ghana established under this
 Constitution.
 (4) In this section, references to property and assets
 vested in or held in trust shall include property and assets
 vested in or held in trust immediately before the thirteenth
 day of January, 1972, for an interest which extended beyond
 the twelfth day of January, 1972, and has not been
 surrendered.
 14. Subject to the provisions of section 13 of this DEVOwbON
 Schedule,                                              "aGHTS.
 (a) where under an existing law, a right, prero-
 gative, power, privilege or function is vested
 in the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
 the right, prerogative, power, privilege and
 function shall, on the coming into force of this
 Constitution, vest in the President or such
 other person or authority as is specified under
 this Constitution who, subject to the provisions
 of this Constitution or any other law, shall have
 power to do all things necessary for the exercise
 or performance thereof; and
 (b) a right, power, privilege, an obligation, a duty
 or function vested in the Government of Ghana
 by an existing law shall continue to be so vested.
 15. (1) It shall not be lawful for any Court to entertain INDMNTY.
 any action or take any decision or order or grant any remedy
 or relief in any proceedings instituted against the Govern-
 ment of Ghana or any person acting under the authority of
 the Government of Ghana whether before or after the
 coming into force of this Constitution or against any person
 or persons acting in concert or individually to assist or
 bring about the change in government which took place on
 the twenty-fourth day of February, 1966, on the thirteenth
 
 173
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 day of January, 1972 and on the fourth day of June, 1979
 in respect of any act or omission relating to, or consequent
 upon,
 (a) the overthrow of the government in power
 before the formation of the National Liberation
 Council, the National Redemption Council and
 the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council; or
 (b) the suspension of the Constitution which came
 into force on the twenty-second day of August,
 1969, or any part thereof or the abrogation
 thereof; or
 (c) the establishment of the National Liberation
 Council, or the National Redemption Council
 or the Supreme Military Council which took
 office on the ninth day of October, 1975, the
 Supreme Military Council established on the
 fifth day of July, 1978 or the Armed Forces
 Revolutionary Council; or
 (d) the exercise referred to in section 16 of this
 Schedule; or
 (e) the establishment of this Constitution.
 (2) For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared
 that no executive, legislative or judicial action taken or
 purported to have been taken by the Armed Forces Revolu-
 tionary Council or by any person in the name of that
 Council shall be questioned in any proceedings whatsoever,
 and, accordingly it shall not be lawful for any Court or
 other tribunal to make any order or grant any remedy or
 relief in respect of any such act.
 (3) The provisions of subsection (2) of this section
 shall have effect notwithstanding that any such action as is
 referred to in that subsection was not taken in accordance
 with any procedure prescribed by any law.
 (4) It shall not be lawful for any Court or other
 tribunal to entertain any action instituted in respect of any
 act or omission against any person acting or omitting to
 act, on the instructions or authority of the Armed Forces
 Revolutionary Council or any member of the Armed
 
 174
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 Forces Revolutionary Council and alleged to be in con-
 travention of any law, whether substantive or procedural,
 in existence before or during the administration of the
 Armed Forces Revolutionary Council.
 16. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Consti- PRESERVA*
 tution, any confiscation of any property and any other IoN oF
 penalties imposed by or under the authority of the Armed TOuNScA
 Forces Revolutionary Council under any Decree made by PENALTIES
 that Council in pursuance of the exercise undertaken by A.OSED BN
 the Council to purge the Armed Forces of corruption and RELATION To
 graft and to restore the image of the Military and to deal EURGIN
 with tne accomplices of the guilty members of the Armed
 Forces and other persons guilty of malpractices to the
 detriment of the economy of Ghana or the public interest
 or both shall not be reversed by any autnority under this
 Constitution.
 17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
 Constitution to the contrary, the Special Tribunal estab- 0o 1on
 lished by the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (Special PURGINO
 Tribunal and Other Matters) Decree, 1979 (A.F.R.C.D. 23) EXERCISE.
 shall take over and complete the trial of all cases pending
 immediately before the coming into force of this Constitu-
 tion before all the special courts established under the
 Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (Special Courts)
 Decree, 1979 (A.F.R.C.D. 3) as amended by the Armed
 Forces Revolutionary Council (Special Courts) (Amend-
 ment) Decree, 1979 (A.R.F.C.D. 19) in respect of all the
 offences charged or which could have been charged and
 may impose in relation thereto any penalty which could
 have been imposed by a special court or by the Armed
 Forces Revolution Council, under the said Armed Forces
 Revolutionary Council (Special Courts) Decree, 1979
 (A.F.R.C.D. 3) as so amended.
 (2) The Special Tribunal shall also have exclusive
 jurisdiction to try all criminal offences disclosed by or
 arising out of the reports submitted by the cornmitlees of
 inquiry referred to in the said Armed Forces Revolutionary
 Council (Special Tribunal and Other Matters) Decree
 1979 (A.F.R.C.D. 23).
 
 175
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 (3) The Special Tribunal shall also have exclusive
 jurisdiction to review the adverse findings of the said
 committees of inquiry on the application of any person
 aggrieved by any such finding.
 (4) Any such committee of inquiry which at the
 coming into force of this Constitution has not submitted
 its report to the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council
 shall, subject to the Provisions of the said Armed Forces
 Revolutionary Council (Special Tribunal and Other
 Matters) - Decree, 1979 (A.F.R.C.D. 23) continue in
 existence until the submission of its report.
 (5) Sections 10 and 11 of this Schedule shall not
 apply to any such committee of inquiry.
 (6) The Special Prosecutor referred to in the
 Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (Special Tribunal
 and Other Matters) Decree, 1979, (A.F.R.C.D. 23) shall
 be responsible for the initiation and conduct of all pro-
 secutions of criminal offences before the Special Tribunal
 established under that Decree.
 (7) The provisions of the Armed Forces Revolu-
 tionary Council (Special Tribunal and Other Matters)
 Decree, 1979 (A.F.R.C.D. 23) shall have effect notwith-
 standing anything contained in this Constitution to the
 contrary.
 ABROGATION 18. (1) The Constitution which came into force on the
 CofS.U-  twenty-second day of August, 1969, and was subsequently
 nON, xC.  suspended is hereby abrogated.
 (2) Upon the coming into force of this Constitution
 the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council (Establishment)
 Proclamation, 1979 shall cease to have effect.
 (3) For the avoidance of doubt, notwithstanding
 the abrogation of the said Constitution and the repeal of the
 said Proclamation any enactment or rule of law in force
 immediately before the coming into force of this Constitu-
 tion shall in so far as it is not inconsistent with a provision
 of this Constitution, continue in force as if enacted, issued
 or made under the authority of this Constitution.
 
 176
 
 
 The Constitution
 
 19. Notwithstanding anything contained in article 210 SECTIONS NT
 of this Constitution Parliament shall have no power to AMENDED.
 amend this section or sections 15, 16, 17 and 18 of this
 Schedule.
 PART V
 PUBLIC CORPORATIONS
 20. Until Parliament enacts an Act of Parliamezt UeI
 in accordance with article 159 of this Constitution for t  TIONS.
 establishment or operation of a public corporation, a public
 corporation in existence before the coming into force of this
 Constitution shall continue its operations under the enact-
 ment under whirh it was established.
 SECOND SCHEDULE
 FORMS OF OATH
 THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
 I, .......................................... .... . . . . . . . . ............. do  hereby
 [in the name of God swear] [solemnly affirm] that I will
 bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as
 by law established; that I will uphold the sovereignty and
 integrity of Ghana; and that I will preserve, protect and
 defend the Constitution. [So help me God.]
 To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or
 such other person as the President may designate.
 
 177
 
 
</pre>
