<pre>
 Madagascar
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF MADAGASCAR
 April 29, 1959, as amended June 28, 1960 and June 6, 1962
 PREAMBLE
 Affirming its faith in God and its belief in the dignity of the human person,
 Decided to guarantee the fundamental rights of man,
 Seeking to promote the economic, social and cultural progress of 
 country and of each of its inhabitants,                           
 Inspired by the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man of the
 United Nations,
 The Malagasy people solemnly proclaims that:
 All men are equal in their rights and duties without distinction of
 origin, race, religion or opinion; the Malagasy State shall endeavor to
 ensure to each of its inhabitants equal opportunity for the complete ful-
 filment of his personality.
 Liberty and security are guaranteed to each individual on condition
 only that they commit no action which could damage the State or threaten
 the liberty and security of others.
 There shall be no unwarrantable interference in the private life, family,
 domicile or correspondence of persons, nor threats to their honor or
 reputation. All persons are entitled to the protection of the law against
 such interference or threats.
 No one may be sentenced except according to a law in force before the
 act was committed. Penal sentence may be pronounced only by a judge.
 No one may be detained arbitrarily. Harshness or coercion greater than
 strictly necessary to arrest or detain a person or any form of moral pressure
 or physical brutality are forbidden.
 All persons have the right freely. to circulate and reside in the territory
 of the State, limited only by legal stipulations relating to health and the
 public order.
 1 Constitution8 et Lois organique de la Republique Malgache et Accord8 Franco-Mal-
 gaches. Textee mie e jour au 15 Octobre 1962. Les Codes Bleus Malgaches. Editions de
 la Librairie de Madagascar, 1962. Supplied by Madagascar Embassy to the United
 Nations. Translated by the Editor.
 
 .456
 
 
 Freedom of expression, of assembly, of association and the freedom to
 form trade unions are guaranteed under the conditions provided by law.
 The family is the natural basis of human society. The State shall
 protect and encourage its cohesion.
 Parents have the right and duty to raise their children by giving them
 the best moral, physical and intellectual education.
 All children have the right to an education which shall be provided
 by the parents and teachers chosen by them.
 The State shall organize public education. It recognizes the right to
 private education and guarantees liberty of education, subject only to
 respect for the requirements of health, morality and capacity stipulated
 by law.
 The State and the territorial units may, for purposes of general interest
 and within the limits of their financial possibilities, assist institutions of
 social work and private education.
 Freedom of thought, of conscience and of religion are guaranteed to
 all, subject only to respect for public morality and order. The State shall
 protect the freedom of worship.
 Property is an inviolable right for all, Malagasy citizens and foreigners
 alike; noone may be deprived of his property except when the public good,
 duly and legally attested, so requires, and subject to just and prior in-
 demnity. The State recognizes the right to duly attested ancestral property.
 The State guarantees the freedom of capital and -of investment in
 programs established or approved by the State in accordance with inter-
 national agreements.
 All individuals shall bend their efforts to the protection, safeguarding,
 improvement or exploitation of the soil, subsoil, forests and natural
 resources of Madagascar to the best of their ability and in the general
 interest.
 The exploitation of man by man is now and for all time forbidden.
 Work is the right and duty of all. As an essential factor in the dignity
 of man and the prosperity of the country, it is a sacred obligation for-all
 not debarred by age or physical inaptitude.
 Noone may be damaged in his work or employment because of his
 origins, his political opinions or his beliefs.
 The right to strike is recognized when it is exercised for the defense of
 the professional rights and interests of workers and within the framework
 of the laws relating thereto.
 The State shall endeavor to ensure to all, and particularly to children,
 mothers and old workers, health protection and material security.
 The rights of the individual shall be exercised within the conditions
 fixed by laws and regulations. They shall be limited only insofar as nec-
 essary to ensure respect for the rights of others and to fulfil the legitimate
 requirements of morality, public order and the continuance of the State.
 
 _Madagascar
 
 457
 
 
 In order to ensure the separation of powers, the law shall guarantee the
 independence of the. judicial authority and the permanency of tenure of
 judges of the bench.
 No one may abuse the rights recognized by the Constitution or the law
 in order to threaten the territorial integrity of the State, the republican
 regime and democracy, nor to violate this Constitution.
 TITLE I
 GENERAL       PROVISIONS
 Art. 1. The people of Madagascar form an independent State. This
 state is a Republic and bears the name of the Malagasy Republic.
 Art. 2. The Malagasy Republic is one, indivisible, democratic and social.
 It affirms its neutrality with respect to different religions. The State and the
 churches enjoy autonomy within their respective domains. All interference
 within the other's domain shall be forbidden.
 The principle of the state is government of the people, by the people
 and for the people.,
 Its motto is "Fahafahana, Tanindrazana, Fandrosoana; Liberty,
 Fatherland, Progress."
 Its emblem is the tricolor flag, white, red and green, composed of three
 rectangular stripes of equal dimensions. The first stripe on the side of the
 staff shall be vertical and white, the two others shall be horizontal,
 the top red and the bottom green.
 The national anthem is "Ry Tanindrazanay Malala 6."
 The State seal and armorial bearings. of the Republic shall be defined
 by a law.
 The official languages of the Republic are Malagasy and French.
 Art. 3. National sovereignty belongs to the people. No section of the
 people, nor any individual, may attribute to themselves or himself the
 exercise thereof.. ,
 The authorities entrusted with the direction of the State shall hold
 their powers from the people by means of direct or indirect elections by
 universal suffrage.
 The vote shall be equal and secret. A law shall determine the conditions
 for its exercise.
 Art. 4. The institutions of the Republic shall be:
 The President of the Republic, Head of the Government;
 The National Assembly;
 The Senate;
 The High Council of Institutions.
 The National Assembly and the Senate together constitute the Parliament.
 
 458
 
 -Madagascar
 
 
 Art. 5. A law shall determine the amount, conditions and use of the
 emoluments granted to the President of the Republic, the members of the
 Government, deputies and members of the Senate.
 No Nooneone may receive two official emoluments.
 Mayors, rural mayors and their assistants may, however, accumulate
 emoluments to the extent of receiving the highest one together with half
 of the lowest one.
 No elective office other than those of mayor, rural mayor and their
 assistants may give rise to the granting of emoluments other than the
 reimbursement of traveling expenses.
 The provisions of this article shall not apply to emoluments which
 may be granted to delegates of Madagascar in international assemblies
 and councils.
 . Art. 6. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the expression of the suffrage. They shall be formed and shall carry on their
 activities freely within the framework of the law. They must respect the
 principles of democracy and the integrity of the State.
 TITLE II
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC AND THE
 GOVERNMENT
 Art. 7. The Government of the Republic shall be constituted by the
 President of the Republic, the Vice-President of. the Government, the
 Ministers and the Secretaries of State.
 Art. 8. The President of the Republic shall be elected by universal
 direct suffrage.
 The office of President of the Republic shall be incompatible with any
 other elective public office.
 . Candidates for the office of President of the Republic must enjoy
 civil and political rights and be at least forty years of age at the date of
 election.
 Art. 9. The President shall be elected for seven years and shall be eligible
 for reelection.
 Election shall be by absolute majority of the voters on the first ballot.
 If this is not obtained, the President shall be elected by relative majority
 on the second ballot.
 The election shall take place, upon convocation of the Government,
 thirty days at least and one hundred and twenty days at the most before
 the expiration of the powers of the President in office.
 . Before assuming office, the President of the Republic shall take an oath
 before the Parliament, meeting specially in Congress for this purpose,
 and shall make the following declaration in the two official languages:
 
 Madagascar
 
 459
 
 
 "I solemnly swear, before God, before our ancestors and before men,
 faithfully to fulfill the high office entrusted to me, to respect faithfully the
 rules and principles laid down in this Constitution, to be guided only by
 the general interest, and to dedicate all my strength to finding and protecting the public good."
 In the event that the Presidency falls vacant, for whatever reason,
 his functions shall be exercised provisionally for the dispatch of current
 affairs by the Vice-President of the Government; the same shall apply
 in the case of a temporary impediment attested by the High Council
 of Institutions. Voting for a new President shall take place thirty days at
 least and one hundred and twenty days at most after the vacancy occurs,
 or after the High Council of Institution has attested to the definitive
 character of the impediment.
 Art. 10. The President of the Republic shall appoint members of the
 Government, he shall nominate from among them the Vice-President of
 the Government. He shall terminate their functions.
 Art. 11. The President of the Republic shall conduct the policy of the
 State in accordance with general directives drawn up in the Council of
 Ministers.
 He shall direct the action of the Government.
 He shall exercise the regulatory power and ensure the execution of the
 laws.
 He shall have the right of pardon and he may, in this connection, consult
 with the High Council of Institutions.
 He shall have the administrative power.
 He shall be commander of the armed forces and responsible for the
 national defense.
 He shall be the head of the internal police forces.
 He shall ensure the maintenance of order and public security.
 He shall have the power to make appointments to state offices, which
 he may delegate to members of the Government with the possibility of
 sub-delegation.
 He shall accredit Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign
 powers; foreign Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary shall be accredited
 to him.
 He shall award decorations of the Malagasy Republic.
 Art. 12. The President of the RepubliC in the Council of Ministers shall:
 - determine the general policy of the Republic;
 - draw up bills to be submitted to the Assemblies;
 - issue the ordinances stipulated in Articles 40 and 43 below;
 - he may proclaim, when circumstances require, and with the consent
 of the Presidents of the National Assembly and Senate, a state of
 national emergency giving him special powers whose extent and
 duration shall be fixed by a law;
 
 460
 
 Madagascar
 
 
 - make appointments to the higher offices of the State as set forth
 in a list enacted by law; and
 - exercise the other powers for which consultation with the Council
 of Ministers is required under this Constitution or under particular
 laws.
 Art. 13. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws
 within fifteen days following the transmission by the National Assembly
 of the finally adopted law.
 He may before the expiration of this time limit, ask the Assembly
 to reconsider a law or certain of its articles. This reconsideration may not
 be refused.
 The law or the articles of the law submitted for reconsideration shall
 not be deemed to have passed unless they have received the favorable
 vote of an absolute majority of the members present at the opening of the
 balloting of the National Assembly and Senate respectively.
 Art. 14. The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties.
 Treaties of alliance, of commerce, treaties or agreements relative to
 international organizations, those that engage the finances of the state,
 those that modify provisions of a legislative nature, those relative to the
 status of persons, peace treaties, those that entail ceding, exchanging or
 adding territory, may be ratified only by a law. They shall take effect
 only after having been ratified or approved. No cession, exchange or
 addition of territory shall be valid without the consent of the populations
 involved.
 If the High Council of Institutions, the matter having been referred
 to it by the President of the Republic or by the President of one of the
 Assemblies, shall declare that an international commitment contains a
 clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify or approve
 this commitment may be given only after amendment of the Constitution.
 Treaties or agreements duly ratified shall, upon their publication, have
 an authority superior to that of laws, subject, for each agreement or
 treaty, to its application by the other party.
 Art. 15. The President of the Republic may, after consultation with the
 Council of Ministers and the President of the National Assembly, and
 with the consent of the Senate by a majority of two thirds of its members,
 declare the dissolution of the National Assembly.
 Elections shall take place twenty days at the least and fifty days at
 the most after the dissolution.
 The Assembly shall convene on the second Tuesday following its election.
 If this meeting takes place between the periods provided for ordinary
 sessions, an extraordinary session shall, by right, be held for a fifteen
 day period.
 There may be no further dissolution within the twelve months following
 these elections.
 
 Madagascar
 
 461.
 
 
 Art. 16. The President of the Republic may delegate certain of his
 powers to the Vice-President of the Government and to the Ministers.
 Art. 17. Acts of the President of the Republic shall be countersigned
 by the Ministers responsible for their execution-and the Seal of State shall
 be affixed to the original of such acts.
 : Art. 18. The President of the Republic and the members of the Government are criminally responsible for acts committed during the exercise
 of their functions and classed as crimes or misdemeanors at the time of
 commission.
 They may be arraigned by the National Assembly and the Senate after
 a single voting by open ballot and by an absolute majority of their members.
 Members of either Assembly who might be called to participate in the
 prosecution, examination or trial may not take part in the vote.
 They shall be entitled to privileged jurisdiction and shall be judged by
 the Court, of Appeal of Tananarive, constituted as a High Court. The First
 President of the Court of Appeal shall preside; two presiding judges chosen
 by lot and eight members of Parliament, five elected from the National
 Assembly and three from the Senate, shall constitute this Court.
 An organic law shall establish the method of selection of members and
 the functioning of the. High Court, as well as the rules of procedure
 applicable therein.
 In all cases the Court shall be bound by the definition of crimes and
 misdemeanors and by the penalties applicable under the penal laws in
 force at the time of commission of the acts in question.
 : However, the privilege of jurisdiction shall not extend to actions which,
 at the time of commission, fall within the jurisdiction of the tribunals of
 the armed forces.
 TITLE III
 THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Art..19. The members of the National Assembly shall be elected for five
 years by universal direct suffrage. They shall bear the title of deputies.
 A law shall determine the method of election of deputies, the conditions
 of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices imcompatible with member-
 ship in the Assembly.
 Art. 20. No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or
 tried as a result of opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of
 his functions.
 No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for criminal
 or minor offenses without the authorization of the Assembly, unless in
 flagrante delicto.
 
 462
 
 Madagascar
 
 
 When the Assembly is not in session, no deputy may be arrested without
 the authorization of the Secretariat of the Assembly of which he is a
 member, unless in flagrante delicto, cases of authorized prosecution, or
 of final conviction.
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 Assembly so demands, but such suspension may not exceed the duration
 of the session in progress.
 Art. 21. The Assembly shall convene automatically in two ordinary
 sessions a year.
 , The first session shall begin on the first Tuesday in May and shall end
 on the last Friday in June.
 The second session shall begin on the first Tuesday in October and shall
 end on the first Friday in December.
 Art. 22. The Assembly shall convene in extraordinary session at the
 request of the President of the Republic or of a majority-of the members
 comprising the Assembly, to consider a specific agenda.
 Extraordinary sessions shall be opened and closed by the President
 of .the Republic:
 When an extraordinary session is held at the request of the deputies,
 the closure decree shall take effect as soon as the Assembly has exhausted
 the agenda for which it was called and at the latest twelve days from the
 date of its meeting.
 The Assembly may not be convened in extraordinary session at the
 request of its members within the month following the closure decree.
 Art. 23. All binding instructions upon deputies shall be null and void.
 The right to vote of deputies shall be personal. However, delegation
 of the vote shall be authorized when the deputy is absent from Madagascar.
 A law shall determine the conditions and methods of such delegation.
 Art. 24. The President and the members of the Government shall have
 access to the Assembly. They shall be heard when they so request.
 They may be assisted by commissioners of the Government.
 Art. 25. The President and the members of the Secretariat of the National
 Assembly shall be elected for one year. They shall be eligible for reelection.
 Art. 26. The meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. An
 in extenso report of the debates shall be published under the conditions
 stipulated by law.
 The Assembly may decide to sit in secret committee at the request of the
 Government or of one fourth of its members.
 
 .Madagascar
 
 463
 
 
 Madagascar
 
 TITLE IV
 THE SENATE
 Art. 27. A council of the territorial units shall be instituted to act
 with the Government and the National Assembly. It shall be called the
 Senate and its members shall bear the title of "Senators."
 The Senate shall examine all bills.
 It may be consulted by the Government on economic and social
 questions and on questions concerning territorial organization.
 Art. 28. Two thirds of the Senate shall consist of members elected,
 an equal number from each province, by the representatives of the
 municipal and rural provincial units. One third of the members of the
 Senate shall represent the economic, social and cultural forces designated
 by the Government, some nominated by the most representative groups
 and some chosen for their particular qualifications.
 Art. 29. Half of each of the two categories of members of the Senate
 shall be renewable every three years. The term of members of the Senate
 shall be six years.
 The rules of procedure, composition and method of appointment of
 members shall be determined by law.
 Art. 30. The Senate shall convene automatically during sessions of
 the National Assembly.
 It may also be convened in special session at the request of the Government. Its agenda shall be set forth in the decree of convocation.
 When the National Assembly is not in session, the Senate may only
 discuss questions referred to it by the Government and may not discuss
 any bills.
 Art. 31. The provisions of Articles 20, 23, 24, 25 and 26 above shall be
 applicable to the Senate.
 The office of member of the Senate shall not be compatible with that
 of member of the National Assembly.
 TITLE V
 THE LEGISLATIVE FUNCTION AND
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
 AND PARLIAMENT
 Art. 32. Laws shall be passed by Parliament under the conditions
 laid down in this Title.
 In addition to matters falling under other articles of the Constitution:
 
 464
 
 
 I. Laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - nationality, citizenship and civil rights;
 - the fundamental guarantees granted to individuals and to groups
 for the exercise of the rights and obligations listed in the Preamble;
 - the obligations imposed by the national defense upon the persons
 and property of citizens;
 - the creation of new juridical systems and their respective competence, civil and commercial rules of procedure, the status of magistrates under the Malagasy State and the guarantees for their independence;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 imposed therefor, criminal procedure, amnesty;
 - property rights, and the conditions under which property may be
 expropriated or requisitioned because of public necessity;
 - civil and commercial obligations;
 - organization of the family, status and legal capacity of persons,
 inheritance and gifts and, generally, the ascertaining, codification
 or modification of customs relating to civil status;
 - the establishment of categories of public institutions.
 II. Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of:
 - the status of public servants, of the territorial units and of public
 institutions;
 - the organization of national defense and the status of military
 personnel;
 - legislation pertaining to relations between employers and employees and the right to form unions;
 - education and professional training;
 - the organization of the liberal professions.
 III. The rules concerning the functioning of the National Assembly
 and the Senate shall be determined in their general principles by law,
 and as to their application by the rules of procedure of each assembly.
 Rules concerning the method of election, the general organization and
 functioning of the municipal and rural assemblies shall be determined
 by law.
 IV. Laws shall determine the basis, the rate and the methods of
 collecting taxes of all kinds imposed for the State account, and the
 issuance of currency in accordance with agreements drawn up for these
 matters.
 They shall determine under what conditions, limitations, and methods,
 the territorial units may create for themselves fiscal or other resources
 and shall delimit, where applicable, the allocation of such resources.
 They shall specify the conditions for loans; laws shall, as necessary,
 provide for the creation of a reserve fund, and shall authorize drawings
 on the assets of such a fund.
 
 Madagascar
 
 465
 
 
 The budgetary laws shall determine the financial resources and obligations of the State. They shall be drawn up and voted under the conditions specified in Article 40 below.
 V. Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives
 of economic and social action, and action relating to the infrastructure
 of the State.
 VI. Laws shall determine the organization of jurisdictions and the
 rules of procedure applicable to administrative litigation.
 VII. The declaration of war may be authorized only by a law passed
 by Parliament.
 VIII. Martial law shall be decreed in a meeting of the Council of
 Ministers. Its prolongation beyond fifteen days may be authorized
 only by Parliament insofar as it has been possible to convoke it.
 Art. 33. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character, such character to be maintained in all
 circumstances.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters may be modified by decrees
 issued after consultation with the High Council of Institutions.
 Art. 34. The President of the Republic and the members of the National
 Assembly and the Senate alike shall have the right to initiate legislation.
 Government bills shall be discussed in the Council of Ministers. They
 shall be filed with the Secretariat of one of the two Assemblies, with the
 exception of bills determining the resources and charges of the State which
 shall be filed first with the Secretariat of the National Assembly.
 Parliamentary bills shall be communicated to the Government before
 they are considered by the National Assembly or the Senate.
 The President of the Republic, on joint motion of the National Assembly
 and the Senate voted separately by an absolute majority of the members
 of each one, may submit to referendum any bill dealing with the organization of the governmental authorities, involving the application of the
 principles contained in the Preamble of the Constitution, or affecting
 the functioning of existing institutions.
 When the referendum decides in favor of the bill, the President of the
 Republic shall promulgate it within the time limit stipulated in Article 13.
 Art. 35. Bills and amendments introduced by members of the Assemblies shall not be considered when their adoption would have as a
 consequence either a diminution of public financial resources or the creation or increase of public expenditure. The same shall apply to bills and
 amendments which are not within the domain of law.
 Art. 36. The discussion of Government bills shall pertain, in the first
 assembly to which they have been referred, to the text presented by the
 Government.
 An Assembly, given a text passed by the other Assembly, shall deliberate
 on the text that is transmitted to it.
 
 466
 
 Madagascar
 
 
 Art. 37. Members of the Assemblies and the Government shall have
 the right of amendment within the conditions specified by law and by the
 rules of procedure of each Assembly.
 Art. 38. The Government may require each Assembly to decide, by a
 single vote, on all or part of the text under discussion:
 (1) during extraordinary sessions, on condition that such texts have
 been deposited within forty-eight hours of the opening of the session;
 (2) during the last eight days of each ordinary session.
 Art. 39. Every government and parliamentary bill shall be examined
 in the first place by the Assembly with which it has been filed, and then
 transmitted to the other Assembly.
 The text shall be considered successively in each Assembly until an
 identical text has been adopted by both Assemblies.
 The Senate shall examine government and parliamentary bills voted
 by the National Assembly within twenty days of their being filed. If no
 action is taken within this period, the Senate shall be considered to have
 voted in favor of the text filed.
 When a government or parliamentary bill is returned to the National
 Assembly after two readings by the Senate, the National Assembly shall
 rule definitively on the third reading.
 Art. 40. Government bills determining the resources and obligations
 of the State shall be voted by the procedure specified in the preceding
 article, with the following exceptions.
 The National Assembly shall examine such bills in first reading within
 a maximum time limit of thirty days from the filing of the bill. If no
 action is taken within this period, it shall be considered to have voted in
 favor and the bill shall be transmitted to the Senate.
 In the same way, the Senate shall examine bills at first reading within
 a time limit of fifteen days from their transmission; there shall be a time
 limit of five days for each Assembly for the subsequent readings.
 If no action is taken within the specified time limits by either Assembly,
 it shall be considered to have voted in favor of the text before it.
 If, after carrying out the provisions of the preceding article, no decision
 has been reached on a bill within a time limit of sixty days after its initial
 filing, the provisions of the bill may be enforced by ordinance, together
 with one or more amendments thereto that may have been adopted by
 both Assemblies.
 Art. 41. The discussion of the bills filed or agreed upon by the Government shall have priority on the agenda of the Assemblies in the order set
 by the Government.
 However, bills determining the resources and obligations of the State
 shall have priority if the Assembly involved so decides.
 Art. 42. The President of the Republic, after deliberation by the Council
 of Ministers, may pledge the responsibility of the Government with regard
 
 Madagascar
 
 467
 
 
 to the program of general policy. He shall then introduce the question of
 confidence. A vote thereon may not take place less than twenty-four hours
 after the question has been introduced.
 The Government may moreover, when circumstances or emergency so
 require, link the question of confidence with a request for a delegation
 of powers on the point or points of the program of general policy declared
 essential to the accomplishment of fundamental objectives which shall
 be specified in the motion of approval.
 A special vote shall take place on such a request for a delegation of
 powers, and the Assembly must agree by an absolute majority of its members.
 Such agreement shall entail authorization to the Government to take,
 by ordinance and during a time limit accepted by the National Assembly,
 such measures of general scope as may abrogate, amend or replace legislative texts presently in force.  .
 Art. 43. The National Assembly may question the responsibility of the
 President of the Republic by the vote of a motion of censure against the
 general policy of the Government. Such a motion shall be admissible only
 if it is signed by at least one fifth of the members of the Assembly. The
 vote may only take place twenty-four hours after the motion has been
 filed. The motion of censure may be adopted only if it is voted by an
 absolute majority of the members comprising the National Assembly.
 Should the motion of censure be rejected, its signatories may not introduce
 another motion before the expiration of one year.
 No motion of censure may be filed within the year following the election
 of the President of the Republic or during the twelve months following the
 approval of the program of general policy of the Government.
 Art. 44. In case approval is refused to the program of the Government
 in the conditions set forth in the first paragraph of Article 43, or by the
 adoption of a motion of censure, the Ministers shall submit their resignations to the President of the Republic.
 The President of the Republic shall immediately consult the Senate with
 regard to the need to maintain or to modify the governmental program.
 The Senate shall rule within a time limit of three days.
 Within a maximum time limit of ten days following the vote of no
 confidence, the President of the Republic shall form a new government.
 At the same time, he shall open the debate before the National Assembly
 on a program of general policy drawn up by the Government in the Council
 of Ministers, and request the approval of the National Assembly thereon.
 The vote may only take place twenty-four hours after the closure of the
 debate on the request for approval.
 If approval is refused to the program of the new Government, the
 Assembly shall be automatically dissolved, and general elections shall take
 place at least twenty days and at most forty days after dissolution.
 
 Madagascar
 
 468
 
 
 Pending the installation of the new Assembly, the Government shall
 ensure the despatch of current business. During this period the Council
 of Ministers shall comprise also the President and two first Vice-President
 of the Senate. The acts of the President of the Republic, of the Vice-
 Presidents and of the Minister of the Interior shall be countersigned by the
 President of the Senate.
 The new National Assembly shall meet by right in extraordinary
 session the second Tuesday following its election. As soon as it has elected
 its officers, the President of the Republic shall submit the program of his
 Government with a request for approval. This program must be the same
 as that for which refusal of approval resulted in the dissolution of the
 Assembly. The vote may only take place twenty four hours after the
 request for approval.
 If approval is refused to the program, the President of the Republic
 shall immediately cease from his functions, the Council of Ministers shall
 be automatically dissolved, and there shall be a new election for President
 of the Republic within thirty days under the conditions stipulated in
 Article 8 above. The retiring President shall not be eligible as a candidate
 in such an election.
 Pending the election of the new President of the Republic, the functions
 of the Chief of Government shall be carried out by the President of the
 Senate. The ministerial responsibilities, limited to the despatch of current
 business, shall be shared among the Vice-Presidents of the two Assemblies
 The President of the National Assembly shall exercise the functions of
 Vice-President.
 TITLE VI
 THE HIGH COUNCIL OF INSTITUTIONS
 ARBITRATION PROCEDURE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
 CONTROL
 Art. 45. The conformity of laws and ordinances to this Constitution
 shall be supervised, under the conditions stipulated in the following
 articles, by the High Council of Institutions.
 Art. 46. The High Council of Institutions shall comprise five persons
 of which at least three shall be chosen for their legal qualifications. Two
 members shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, two by
 the President of the National Assembly and one by the President of the
 Senate.
 The President of the High Council of Institutions shall be appointed
 by the President of the Republic; he shall have the casting vote in the
 event of a tie.
 The members of the High Council of Institutions shall be appointed
 
 Madagascar
 
 469
 
 
 for seven years. Their term shall not be renewable. Their functions shall
 not be compatible with those of member of the Government, with any
 elective office or with the exercise of any private profession. A law shall
 set forth the conditions under which public office or missions may be
 entrusted by the President of the Republic to members of the High
 Council of Institutions. They shall receive emoluments calculated in
 relation to a category of high officials.
 In addition to the five members provided above, former Presidents
 of the Republic shall be members of the High Council of Institutions
 automatically.
 Art. 47. Before promulgation, laws may be referred to the High Council
 of Institutions by the President of the Republic, the President of the
 National Assembly or the President of the Senate.
 The time limit for promulgation shall be suspended when the High
 Council of Institutions is seized of a law. It must rule within a time limit
 of one month.
 In case of emergency so attested by the President of the Republic,
 the High Council of Institutions must rule within a time limit of eight
 days.
 Before promulgation, ordinances, in particular those taken in application
 of Article 43 above, must be submitted by the President of the Republic
 to the High Council of Institutions which shall rule thereon within a
 time limit of eight days.
 A provision which the High Council of Institutions deems unconstitutional may not be promulgated. The President of the Republic may
 decide either to promulgate the other provisions of the law, or to submit
 them again to consideration by the Assembly, or to consider them null
 and void.
 After promulgation of a law, the High Council of Institutions may
 at any time be seized of a request by the President of the Republic, taken
 in. Council of Ministers, for the annulment of a legislative provision deemed
 to be unconstitutional. If the High Council of Institutions, thus seized,
 considers that a legislative provision is unconstitutional such provision
 shall be abrogated automatically.
 Art. 48. The rules of procedure of the Assemblies may be submitted
 before their entry into force to the High Council of Institutions which
 shall, within a time limit of one month, rule upon their conformity to
 the Constitution and the laws.
 The members of the Assemblies, by means of a request signed by at
 least one fifth of the members of the Assembly whose rules of procedure
 are in question, may refer the matter to the High Council, or the President
 of the Republic may do so.
 A text containing an unconstitutional provision may not enter into
 effect.
 
 470
 
 Madagascar
 
 
 Art. 49. In case of disagreement between the Government and the
 President of the Assembly concerned on the application of the provisions
 of Article 34 above, the High Council of Institutions, at the request of
 either, shall rule within eight days.
 Art. 50. In addition to the powers set forth in the preceding articles,
 the High Council of Institutions shall rule in cases of contestation on the
 legality of the appointment of the President of the Republic, of deputies,
 of senators and of members of the General Councils of the Provinces.
 Art. 51. The decisions of the High Council of Institutions must be
 accompanied by the reasons therefor, and may not be appealed to any jurisdiction whatsoever. They must be recognized by all administrative and
 judicial authorities of the State.
 The High Council of Institutions may also be consulted by the Government on the constitutionality of any bill or decree. The Government may
 request the High Council's advice on the interpretation of a legislative
 provision.
 Art. 53. A law shall determine the rules of organization and functioning
 of the High Council of Institutions, the procedure to be followed before
 it and the time limits within which it must be seized of disputes.
 TITLE VII
 THE TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 54. The creation or elimination of territorial units, the general
 rules for their organization and functioning shall fall within the domain
 of law.
 Articles 55 to 64 abrogated, as from January 1, 1963, by decree of June 6,
 1962.
 TITLE VIII
 AMENDMENT
 Art. 65. The President of the Republic, after consideration by the
 Council of Ministers, and the members of the National Assembly and
 Senate, alike, shall have the right to initiate amendment of the Constitution. In the case of members of the Assemblies, a proposed amendment
 shall be admissible only if presented by at least one quarter of the members
 of the Assembly in question.
 Amendment bills shall be examined first by the National Assembly
 and an identical text must be voted by both Assemblies.
 An amendment shall be adopted only if it is voted by a majority of two
 thirds of the members of the National Assembly and of three fifths of the
 members of the Senate.
 The republican form of government shall not be subject to amendment.
 Art. 66. This law shall abrogate Constitutional Law Number 1 of
 October 14, 1958. It shall be executed as the Constitution of the Malagasy Republic.
 
 
</pre>
