<pre>
 Gabon
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF GABON
 February 21, 1961
 PREAMBLE
 The People of Gabon, conscious of its responsibility before God, animated
 by the will to maintain its national independence and unity, and to order
 its common life in accordance with the principles of social justice, solemnly
 reaffirms the rights and liberties of Man defined in 1789 and consecrated by
 the Universal Declaration of the Rights of Man in 1948. .
 By virtue of these principles and of that of the self-determination of
 peoples, the People of Gabon adopts the present Constitution.
 PRELIMINARY SECTION
 Art. 1. The People of Gabon proclaims in addition its attachment to
 the following principles:
 (1) Everyone has the right to the free development of his personality,
 within the limits of respect for the rights of others and for the public
 order.
 (2) Freedom of conscience, the free practice of religion, within the limits
 of the public order, are guaranteed to all.
 (3) The secrecy of correspondence, of postal, telegraphic, and telephonic
 communications is inviolable. No restriction on this inviolability may
 be ordered except in application of a law..
 (4) Everyone has the right to work and the right to obtain employment.
 No one may be injured in his work by reason of sex, origin, beliefs,
 or opinions.
 (5) The State, insofar as possible, guarantees to all, in particular to the
 child, the mother, and aged workers, the protection of their health,
 material security, rest, and leisure.
 1 Journal Officiel de la Rgpublique Gabonaise, Feb. 28, 1961. Supplied by Ministry
 of Foreign Affairs. Translated by Carol-Joyce Howell, (Translators' Co-operative,
 Philadelphia), revised by the Editor.
 
 194
 
 
 (6) Every person, individual as well as collective, has the right to
 property.
 No one may be arbitrarily deprived of his property unless public
 necessity, legally established, so requires, and then only.on condition
 of just and prior indemnification.
 (7) The domicile is inviolable. No search can be ordered except by a
 judge or by the other authorities designated by law. Searches cannot
 be carried out except in the form prescribed by law. Measures infringing
 or restricting the inviolability of the domicile may be taken only to meet
 collective danger or to protect persons in danger of death. Such measures
 may also be taken in furtherance of a law to protect public order against
 imminent danger, in particular to combat the risk of an epidemic or to
 protect endangered youth.
 (8) The right to form  associations or societies or establishments for
 social purposes, as well as religious communities, is guaranteed to all,
 under the conditions stipulated by law.
 Religious communities shall regulate and administer their affairs in an
 independent way, on condition that they respect the principles of
 national sovereignty and public order.
 Associations or societies whose aims or activities are contrary to the
 penal law and to the good understanding of ethnic groups are forbidden.
 All acts of racial, ethnic, or religious discrimination, as well as all
 regional propaganda which may threaten the internal security of the
 State or the integrity of the territory of the Republic, are punishable
 in accordance with the law.
 (9) Marriage and the family form the natural basis of Society. They
 are placed under the special protection of the State.
 (10) The care to be given to infants and their education constitute a
 natural right and duty for the parents, which they shall perform under
 the surveillance and with the aid of the State and public bodies.
 Parents have the right, within the framework of schooling requirements,
 to decide on the education of their children.
 Children born outside of wedlock have the same rights as legitimate
 children, both in regard to their assistance and to their physical,
 intellectual, and moral development.
 (11) The protection of youth against exploitation and against moral,
 intellectual, and physical abandonment, is an obligation of the State and
 of the public bodies.
 (12) The State guarantees the equal access of children and adults to
 instruction, professional training, and culture.
 The State has the duty to organize public education on the bases of
 free instruction and religious neutrality.
 The right to found private schools is guaranteed to everyone, to all
 religious communities and all legally constitued associations which agree
 
 Gabon
 
 195
 
 
 to submit to the pedagogic control of the State and to the laws in force.
 A law shall regulate the conditions for participation of the State and of
 public bodies in the financial burdens of private establishments which
 the State recognizes to be or public utility.
 In public educational establishments, religious instruction may be given
 to the pupils at the request of their parents, under the conditions
 determined by. the regulations.
 (18) The Nation proclaims the solidarity and equality of all with
 respect to the expenditures resulting from national calamities.
 Everyone must participate in proportion to his resources in public
 expenditures.
 TITLE I
 THE REPUBLIC AND SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 2. Gabon is an indivisible, democratic, and social Republic. It
 affirms the separation of religions and State.
 The Republic of Gabon guarantees equality before the law of all
 citizens without distinction of origin, race, or religion. It respects all
 beliefs.
 The national emblem is the tricolor flag, green, yellow, blue, with
 three horizontal stripes of equal dimensions.
 The national anthem is "La Concorde."
 The motto of the Republic is "Union-Work-Justice."
 The seal of the Republic is a Nursing Mother.
 Its principle is: "Government of the People, by the People and for the
 People."
 The Republic of Gabon adopts French as the official language.
 Its capital is Libreville. It cannot be transferred except by law.
 Art. 3. National sovereignty derives from the people which exercises
 it directly by election and referendum, and indirectly by the organs invest-
 ed with the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial powers.
 No section of the people, nor any individual, may usurp this right.
 Suffrage shall be universal, equal, and secret. It may be direct or indirect
 under the conditions stipulated by the Constitution or by law.
 All Gabonese nationals of both sexes, who are 21 years of age and who
 enjoy civil and political rights may vote under conditions stipulated by
 law.
 This age may be reduced to 18 years in cases stipulated by law.
 Aliens residing in Gabon may be given the right to vote, in addition to
 other rights reserved to Gabonese nationals, under the conditions and in the
 cases stipulated by law.
 
 196
 
 Gabon
 
 
 The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of referendum
 procedures and shall proclaim their results.
 Art. 4. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the expres-
 sion of the suffrage. They shall be formed and exercise their activity
 freely within the limits fixed by the laws and regulations. They must
 respect democratic principles, national sovereignty, and public order.
 Art. 5. The Republic of Gabon is organized in accordance with the
 principle of the distinction of the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial
 Powers.
 TITLE II
 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC AND THE
 GOVERNMENT
 Art. 6. The President of the Republic shall be the Chief of State, he
 shall embody the National Unity, uphold respect for the Constitution,
 and ensure the regular functioning of the Governmental authorities and
 the continuity of the State.
 He shall be the guarantor of the national independence, of the integrity
 of the territory, and of respect for agreements and treaties.
 He shall determine and conduct the policy of the Nation.
 He shall be the exclusive holder of the Executive Power.
 Art. 7. The President of the Republic shall be elected for seven years
 by direct universal suffrage. He may be re-elected.
 The President of the Republic shall be elected by an absolute majority
 on the first ballot. If this is not obtained, the President of the Republic
 shall be elected by a relative majority on the second ballot, which shall
 take place fifteen days after the first count.
 The convocation of the voters shall be by decree in the Council of
 Ministers.
 The elections shall take place at least 20 days and at most 50 days before
 the expiration of the powers of the incumbent President.
 A law shall prescribe the conditions for eligibility, for presentation
 of candidacies, for the method of balloting, counting of votes, and an-
 nouncement of the results.
 The Supreme Court shall supervise the regularity of these operations.
 Art. 8. The President of the Republic shall be assisted by Vice-Presidents
 of the Government whom he shall appoint and who shall exercise the
 powers which he may delegate to them in his name.
 Art. 9. In the case of an interim or of temporary impediment in the
 functioning of the President of the Republic, these functions, with the
 exclusion of the powers specified in Articles 16, 17 and 19, shall be pro-
 visionally exercised by a Vice-President of the Government.
 
 Gahon
 
 197
 
 
 Art. 10. In the case that the Presidency of the Republic. has been
 vacated, for any cause whatsoever, as officially noted by the Supreme
 Court to which the matter has been referred-by the Government or by the
 President of the National Assembly, the President of the Republic shall
 provisionally be replaced by a Vice-President of the Republic until the
 election by direct universal suffrage of a new President of the Republic,
 which election must take place at the latest within three months of the
 establishment of the vacancy.
 Art. 11. When he assumes office, the President of the Republic shall
 solemnly swear, before the National Assembly, the following oath: "I
 swear to devote my strength to the good of the Gabonese people, with the
 object of enhancing its welfare and protecting it from all harm, to respect
 and defend the Constitution, to fulfil conscientiously the duties of my
 office, and to be just toward all."
 Art. 12. The President of the Republic shall promulgate the laws within
 fifteen days following the transmission to the Government of the finally
 adopted law. This time limit shall be reduced to five days in .cases of
 urgency so declared by the National Assembly.
 The President of the Republic may, before the expiration of the time
 limit, request a second reading of the law or of certain of its articles. This
 second reading may not be refused.
 When the text thus submitted to a second reading is adopted by a
 majority of two thirds of the deputies, either in its initial form or after
 modification, the President of the Republic shall promulgate it within
 the time limit specified above.
 In 'the absence of promulgation of the law by the President of the
 Republic in the conditions and time limits specified above, promulgation
 shall be made by the President of the National Assembly.
 Art. 13. The President of the Republic shall ensure the execution
 of laws and of decisions of justice.
 He shall hold the regulatory power.
 He shall sign orders and decrees.
 The acts of the President of the Republic, with the exception of those
 specified in Articles 8, 16, 17, 19, 21, 32, 34, 46 and 53, shall be counter-
 signed by the appropriate Ministers.
 Art. 14. The President of the Republic shall accredit ambassadors and
 envoys extraordinary to foreign powers. Foreign ambassadors and envoys
 extraordinary shall be accredited to him.
 'Art. 15. The President of the Republic shall have the right of pardon
 under the conditions stipulated by law.
 Art. 16. The President of the Republic, after consultation with the
 Council of Ministers and the 'Secretariat of the National Assembly, may
 submit to referendum any question which seems to him to demand the
 direct consultation of the people.
 
 198
 
 Gabon
 
 
 Art. 17. In case of necessity, the President of the Republic may, after
 consultation with the Council of Ministers and with the President of the
 National Assembly, declare the dissolution of the National Assembly.
 He may, under the same conditions, prorogue once the powers of the
 National Assembly for a period of at the most eighteen months.
 In case of an anticipated dissolution, the election of a new National
 Assembly shall take place within at least twenty days and at most forty
 days after the dissolution.
 Convocation of the voters shall be by decree in. the Council of Ministers.
 Art. 18. The President of the Republic may, when circumstances so
 require, proclaim by decree martial law or siege law, which shall entail
 special powers under conditions stipulated by law.
 Art. 19. When the institutions of the Republic, the independence or
 higher interests of the Nation, the integrity of its territory, or the execution
 of its international engagements are threatened by a clear and present
 danger, and the regular functioning of the Governmental authorities is
 interrupted, the President of the Republic shall take the measures required
 by the circumstances, after consultation with the President of the National
 Assembly.
 He shall inform the Nation of these measures by a message.
 Art. 20. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the civil
 and military administrations.
 He shall have all government forces under his command.
 He shall make appointments to the civil and military offices of the State.
 A law shall determine the higher offices of the State to be filled by a
 decree in the Council of Ministers, as well as the conditions under which
 the power of the President of the Republic to make appointments to
 office may be delegated by him and exercised in his name.
 Art. 21. The President of the Republic shall be the Head of the Govern-
 ment; he shall appoint its members and determine their powers.
 The members of the Government shall be responsible to him.
 He shall terminate their functions by a decree in the Council of
 Ministers.
 Members of the Government must be at least 25 years of age and must
 enjoy civil and political rights.
 They shall be chosen both from among the members of the National
 Assembly and from outside it.
 They shall be criminally responsible for crimes and misdemeanors
 committed in the exercise of their functions.
 The number of members of the Government, the activities deemed
 incompatible with their functions, and their emoluments shall be deter-
 mined by the law.
 Art. 22. The President of the Republic shall preside over the Council
 of Ministers.
 
 Gahon
 
 199
 
 
 He shall cause minutes of the meetings to be drawn up and kept.
 With the exception of the cases expressly specified in other articles of
 this Constitution, the following matters must be referred to the Council
 of Ministers:
 - decisions concerning the general policy of the Republic;
 - agreements with foreign powers;
 - hills;
 - regulatory ordinances and decrees;
 - proclamations of martial law and siege law.
 Art. 23. Bills, ordinances, and regulatory decrees, before being submitted
 to the Council of Ministers, may be examined for an opinion by the Supreme
 Court.
 Art. 24. The President of the Republic may delegate his powers to the
 members of the Government, with the exception of those specified in
 Articles 16, 17 and 19.
 Art. 25. The President of the Republic shall communicate with the
 National Assembly either directly or by messages which he shall cause to
 be read. These communications shall not be followed by any debate.
 Between sessions, the National Assembly shall be convened especially
 for this purpose.
 TITLE III
 THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
 Art. 26. The Parliament of the Gabonese Republic shall consist of a
 single Assembly, called the National Assembly.
 The members of the National Assembly shall bear the title of deputies.
 They shall be elected for 5 years by direct universal suffrage.
 The National Assembly shall pass laws, approve taxes, and supervise
 the action of the Government under the conditions specified by the
 Constitution.
 Art. 27. A law shall determine the number of deputies, the conditions
 of their election, the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices
 incompatible with membership in the Assembly, and their emoluments.
 No one may be prevented from being legally invested with a parlia-
 mentary mandate or from exercising it.
 Art. 28. The National Assembly shall pronounce on the validity of the
 election of its members. In case of dispute, the Supreme Court, on the
 appeal of a candidate, shall rule on the eligibility of the deputies and the
 regularity of their election.
 Art. 29. No deputy may be prosecuted, arrested, detained, or tried
 as a result of the opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of
 his functions.
 
 200
 
 Gabon
 
 
 No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for criminal
 or minor offences without the authorization of the National Assembly.
 When Parliament is not in session, no deputy may be arrested without
 the authorization of the secretariat of the National Assembly, except in
 flagrante delicto, cases of authorized prosecution, or of final conviction.
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 National Assembly so requests.
 Art. 30. All binding instructions on deputies shall be null and void.
 The right to vote of deputies shall be personal.
 The rules of procedure of the National Assembly may exceptionally
 authorize the delegation of the vote in specific cases. No one may be
 delegated more than one vote.
 Art. 31. The National Assembly shall meet automatically on the first
 working day following the fifteenth day after its election. Other than
 urgent questions submitted to it by the President of the Republic, its
 agenda shall then comprise exclusively the designation of its President
 and of its secretariat.
 The President and Secretariat of the National Assembly shall be elected
 for the entire duration of the legislature.
 Art. 32. The National Assembly shall meet by right in two ordinary
 sessions a year.
 The first session shall open on the third Tuesday in April; its duration
 may not exceed fifty days. The second session shall. open on the first
 Tuesday in October and shall end at the latest on the third Friday of
 December.
 The opening of the session shall be postponed to the following day if the
 day specified is a holiday.
 Ordinary sessions shall be adjourned by decree of the President of the
 Republic given after advice by the Secretariat of the National Assembly.
 Art. 33. The National Assembly shall meet automatically for the
 duration of martial law and may not be dissolved at such a time.
 Art. 34. The National Assembly shall meet in extraordinary session
 upon convocation by its President and to conside a specific agenda, at
 the request of either the President of the Republic or of half the members
 comprising the National Assembly. As soon as the agenda has been
 exhausted, or fifteen days at the latest after the opening of the session,
 closure shall be pronounced by decree of the President of the Republic.
 Only the President of the Republic may ask for a new session before
 the end of the month following the closure decree.
 Art. 35. Meetings of the National Assembly shall be public. An in
 extenso report of the debates shall be published in the Journal des Dibats.
 The National Assembly may sit in secret session at the request of the
 President of the Republic or of one third of its members.
 Art. 36. The National Assembly shall vote its rules of procedure which
 
 Gahon
 
 201
 
 
 may not, however, take effect, until the Supreme Court has ruled that
 they conform to the Constitution.
 TITLE IV
 THE RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ASSEMBLY
 AND THE GOVERNMENT
 Art. 37. With the exception of the cases expressly provided in other
 articles of the Constitution, laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - the exercise of the rights and duties of citizens;
 - the obligations imposed by the public welfare and in particular by
 the national defense upon the persons and property of the Gabonese;
 - nationality, status.and legal capacity of persons, marriage contracts,
 inheritance and gifts;
 - the organization of civil status;
 - the electoral system of the National Assembly and of the Assemblies
 of the territorial units;
 the organization and operation of the territorial units;
 - judicial organization; the creation of new juridical systems and the
 status of magistrates;
 - the organization of public prosecutors' offices, the professions of
 law officers;
 - the determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 therefor, criminal procedure; the prison system, amnesty and the right
 of pardon;
 martial law, the state of emergency, and the state of defense;
 - regulations of associations;
 - the basis, the rate and the method of collecting taxes of all types;
 the issuance of currency;
 - the general statute for government offices;
 - .the nationalization of enterprises and transfer of property from the
 public to the private sector;
 - the creation or the suppression of autonomous public establishments
 and services in respect of which the Government has the sole initiative;
 the general administrative and financial organization;
 - the conditions for the participation of the State in the activity of
 certain societies and for State control of the operations of these societies;
 - public domain, landed property, forests and mines;
 - property rights, civil and commercial obligations;
 - the loans and financial engagements of the State;
 - plans of economic and social action;
 - the conditions under which finance laws are presented and voted
 and the national accounts regulated.
 
 202
 
 Gahon
 
 
 Laws shall determine, in addition, the fundamental principles of:
 - education;
 - the right to work;
 - social security;
 - the rights of unions, including the conditions for exercising the
 right to strike;
 - benefit societies and savings;
 - the general organization of defense.                             .
 Laws shall delegate to the President of the Republic the power to
 specify and complete their provisions by decrees after consultation, if
 necessary, with the Supreme Court.
 The President of the Republic shall take by decree the measures neces-
 sary for the implementation of laws.
 The provisions of this article may be elaborated, revised, or completed
 by law, with the consent of the Government and after consultation with
 the Supreme Court.
 - Art. 38. All of the resources and expenditures of the Republic must
 ba calculated and entered in the budget for each financial year.
 The budget shall be filed by the Government at the opening of the
 second ordinary session and at the latest on November 15, and issued as
 a law, entitled the finance law, before the beginning of the new financial
 year. This law may include only provisions of a strictly financial nature.
 If the National Assembly adjourns at the end of the budget session
 without having passed the budget in balance, the President of the Republic
 shall draw it up provisionally by ordinance on the basis of the budget
 of the preceding year and of the rate of assessments and taxes voted by the
 National Assembly.
 These ordinances may, however, where necessary provide for reductions
 of expenditures or increases of fiscal or other revenues.
 At the request of the President of the Republic, the National Assembly
 shall be convoked within fifteen days in an extraordinary session, for
 further deliberation. If the National Assembly has not passed the budget
 in balance at the end of this extraordinary session, the budget shall. be
 definitively implemented by ordinance of the President of the Republic.
 The new revenues which may be created thereby, whether derived from
 direct levies and contributions or from comparable taxes, shall be assigned
 for payment reckoning from January first.
 Art. 39. The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war.
 Art. 40. Prorogation of martial law beyond fifteen days may. be au-
 thorized only by the National Assembly.
 Art. 41. Matters other than those that fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character.
 They shall be the subject of decrees of the President of the Republic;
 For the application of such decrees, orders may be issued on such
 
 Gabon
 
 203
 
 
 matters by the responsible Ministers or by any other administrative
 authority competent to do so, upon delegation by the President of the
 Republio.
 Legislative texts concerning matters which fall within the regulatory
 domain may be modified by decree of the President of the Republic.
 Art. 42. The President of the Republic may, in order to carry out his
 program, ask the National Assembly to authorize him for a limited period,
 to take through ordinances measures which normally fall within the
 domain of law.
 These ordinances shall be enacted after consultation with the Supreme
 Court. They shall come into force upon their publication.
 At the expiration of the time limit referred to in the first paragraph of
 the present article, the ordinances may be modified only by law in those
 matters which are within the legislative domain.
 Art. 43. The President of the Republic and the Deputies alike shall
 have the right to initiate legislation.
 Proposals for laws emanating from the deputies shall be filed with the
 secretariat of the National Assembly and transmitted, to the Government
 for its opinion.
 The Government must give its opinion, at the latest, during the session
 following the date of filing.
 If the Government responds unfavorably and the proposal does not
 fall within the provisions of Articles 45 and 46, its author may request the
 National Assembly directly to examine his proposal during the session.
 Art. 44. Discussion of Government bills shall, if it so requests, pertain
 to the text presented by the Government. Discussion of Assembly bills
 shall pertain to the commission's text.
 In case of a counter-proposal, discussion shall pertain first to the text
 presented by the Government.
 Art. 45. The deputies have the right of amendment. Bills or amendments
 presented by the deputies shall not be admissible when their adoption
 would have as a consequence either a decrease in receipts, or the creation
 or increase of a public debt without provision of the corresponding receipts.
 Art. 46. If it appears in the course of the legislative procedure that a
 bill or an amendment is not within the domain of law or is contrary to a
 delegation of authority granted by virtue of Article 42, the President of
 the Republic or the President of the National Assembly may declare its
 inadmissibility.
 In case of disagreement, the Supreme Court, upon the request of the
 President of the Republic or of the President of the National Assembly,
 shall rule within a time limit of eight days.
 The period for promulgation shall, if necessary, be suspended pending
 the Supreme Court's ruling.
 Art. 47. The Government shall be informed of the agenda of the
 
 204
 
 Gabon
 
 
 Assembly and of the commissions. The members of the Government shall
 have access to the National Assembly; they shall participate in the debates
 and may be assisted by commissioners of the Government.
 The Ministers and their commissioners shall have access to the com-
 missions of the Assembly; they shall be heard by them at their request
 and at the request of the commissions.
 Art. 48. The discussion of the bills filed or agreed upon by the Govern-
 ment shall have priority on the agenda of the National Assembly in the
 order set by the Government.
 Art. 49. Either the Government or the deputies may request that a
 law be voted urgently. When the Government so requests it shall be done
 automatically. When it is requested by deputies, the Assembly shall
 pronounce on the need for urgency.
 Art. 50. The Assembly's means of supervision of the Government shall
 be:
 - the written question;
 - the oral question without debate;
 - the commission of inquiry.
 One meeting per week shall be reserved by priority for questions of the
 deputies and replies by the Government.
 A law shall determine the organization and operation of commissions
 of inquiry.
 TITLE V
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
 Art. 51. The President of the Republic shall have the supreme direction
 of international negotiations. He shall sign and ratify treaties and inter-
 national agreements.
 Art. 52. Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties relating to
 international organization, those that imply a commitment for the finances
 of the State, those that modify provisions of a legislative nature, those
 relative to the status of persons, those that call for the cession, exchange,
 or addition of territory, may be ratified only by a law.
 The shall take effect only after having been regularly ratified.
 No cession, no exchange, no addition of territory shall be valid without
 the consent of the Gabonese people expressed in a referendum and after
 consultation with the populations concerned.
 Art. 53. If the Supreme Court, the matter having been referred to it
 by the President of the Republic or by the President of the National
 Assembly, shall declare that an international commitment contains a
 clause contrary to the Constitution, the authorization to ratify this com-
 mitment may be given only after amendment of the Constitution.
 
 Gabon
 
 205
 
 
 Art. 54. Treaties or agreements duly ratified shall, upon their publi-
 cation, have an authority superior to that of laws, subject for each
 agreement or treaty, to its application by the other party.
 TITLE VI
 THE    JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
 Art. 55. Justice shall be rendered over the territory of the State in the
 name of the Gabonese People.
 Art. 56. The judicial authority shall be independent. Judges, in the
 exercise of their functions, shall be subject only to the law.
 Magistrates may not be removed from office except under conditions
 stipulated by law.
 Art. 57. The President of the Republic shall be the guarantor of the
 independence of the judicial authority.
 He shall be assisted by the High Council of the Judiciary over which
 he shall preside.
 The organization and powers of the High Council of the Judiciary shall
 le stipulated by law.
 Art. 58. No one may be arbitrarily detained. Every accused person is
 presumed innocent until he has been found guilty after proceedihgs giving
 him the guarantees indispensable to his defense.
 The judicial authority, guardian of individual liberty, shall ensure
 respect for these principles under the conditions stipulated by law.
 TITLE VII
 THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 59. A  supreme Court shall be instituted consisting of four
 Chambers:
 . - the Constitutional Chamber;
 - the Judiciary Chamber;
 - the Administrative Chamber;
 - the Chamber of Accounts.
 A law shall determine the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and of each
 of its Chambers, as well as their composition, organization, rules and the
 procedure to be followed before them.
 Art. 60. The juridical decisions of the Supreme Court may not be
 appealed to any jurisdiction whatsoever. They shall be binding upon the
 Governmental authorities and upon all administrative and judicial
 authorities.
 
 206
 
 Gahon
 
 
 A provision declared unconstitutional may not be promulgated or
 implemented.
 Art. 61. The Supreme Court shall exercise consultative powers in the
 cases stipulated by the Constitution or by law. It shall give its opinion
 on all bills or decrees and on. all juridical and administrative questions
 submitted to it by the Government.
 It may also, on its own initiative, call the attention of the Government
 to reforms of a legislative or regulatory nature which seem to it to be
 consonant with the general interest.
 TITLE VIII
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 62. A High Court of Justice shall be instituted, composed of mem-
 bers elected by the National Assembly from among its members after
 each general election.
 A. law shall determine its composition, its rules and also the procedure
 to be followed before it.
 . Art. 63. The High Court of Justice shall try the President of the
 Republic solely in the case of high treason, and the members of the Govern-
 ment, as well as their accomplices, in cases of plots against the security
 of the State.
 The President of the Republic and the members of the Government
 may be indicted before the High Court of Justice only by the National
 Assembly ruling by secret vote by a majority of two thirds of its members.
 The National Assembly may be distrained only by at least one third of
 the deputies.
 In the cases provided for by the first paragraph, the High Court shall
 be bound by the definition of crimes and misdemeanors, as well as by the
 determination of penalties as they are established by the criminal laws in
 force when the acts are committed.
 TITLE IX
 THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
 Art. 64. The Economic and Social Council whenever the Government
 calls upon it, shall give its opinion on problems of an economic and social
 character. Any plan and any bill dealing with a plan, as well as any
 provision of a fiscal nature, shall be submitted to it for its advice.
 A member of the Economic and Social Council may be designated by
 the latter, at the request of the President of the Republic or of the President
 of the National Assembly, to present before the Assembly the opinion
 
 Gahon
 
 207
 
 
 of the Council on Government or parliamentary bills that have been
 submitted to it.
 Art. 65. The composition of the Economic and Social Council, its
 organization, and its rules of procedure shall be determined by law.
 Art. 66. Nationals of the French Republic may be members of the
 Economic and Social Council.
 Nationals of other countries may also be members under conditions
 to be determined by law.
 TITLE X
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 67. The territorial units of the Republic shall be created by law.
 They may not be modified or suppressed except after notification by the
 Councils involved and under the conditions stipulated by law.
 They shall be free to govern themselves through elected Councils,
 under the conditions stipulated by law, particularly insofar as their
 jurisdiction and resources are concerned.
 In the territorial units, the delegate of the Government shall, in parti-
 cular, be responsible for the national interests, for the maintenance of
 public order, for administrative supervision, and for seeing that the laws
 are respected.
 TITLE XI
 AGREEMENTS OF CO-OPERATION AND
 ASSOCIATION
 Art. 68. The Gabonese Republic may conclude agreements of co-
 operation or association with other States. It agrees to create together
 with others international organizations for common administration, for
 co-ordination, and for voluntary co-operation.
 TITLE XII
 AMENDMENT
 Art. 69. The President of the Republic, the Council of Ministers and
 the deputies alike have the right to initiate amendment of the Consti-
 tution.
 A parliamentary bill of amendment must, in order to be considered, be
 filed by at least one-half of the deputies making up the National Assembly.
 An amendment shall become operative when it has been approved by
 
 208
 
 Gabon
 
 
 referendum, except when the amendment in question has been approved
 by a majority of two thirds of the members making up the National
 Assembly.
 Art. 70. No amendment procedure can be undertaken or continued
 when it threatens the integrity of the territory.
 The republican and democratic form of the State may not be the subject
 of amendment.
 TITLE XIII
 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
 Art. 71. The institutions provided for by the present Constitution
 shall be established within six months after its promulgation. During this
 transitional period, the President of the Republic shall take, in the form of
 ordinances, all measures necessary to ensure the regular functioning of the
 governmental authorities and the continuity of the State.
 Art. 72. The laws and regulations currently in force, insofar as they
 are not contrary to the present Constitution, shall remain applicable so
 long as they have not been modified or abrogated.
 Art. 73. The present Constitution, which abrogates that of November
 14, 1960, shall be published in the Journal Officiel and executed as the
 Law of the State.
 Libreville, February 21, 1961
 
 Gabon
 
 209
 
 
</pre>
