<pre>
 Liberia
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA'
 July 26, 1847 as amended to May 1955
 ARTICLE 1
 DECLARATION OF RIGHTS
 The end of the institution, maintenance, and administration of government, is to secure the existence of the body politic, to protect it, and to
 furnish the individuals who compose it with the power of enjoying in
 safety and tranquillity, their natural rights, and the blessings of life; and
 whenever these great objects are not obtained, the people have a right to
 alter the government and to take measures necessary for their safety,
 prosperity, and happiness.
 Therefore, we the people of the Commonwealth of Liberia, in Africa,
 acknowledging, with devout gratitude, the goodness of God, in granting
 to us the blessings of the Christian Religion, and political, religious and
 civil liberty, do, in order to secure these blessings for ourselves and our
 posterity, and to establish justice, insure domestic peace, and promote
 the general welfare, hereby solemnly associate and constitute ourselves
 a Free, Sovereign and Independent State by the name of the REPUBLIC
 of LIBERIA, and do ordain and establish this Constitution for the government of the same.
 Sec. 1. All men are born equally free and independent, and have
 certain natural, inherent, and inalienable rights, among which are the
 rights of enjoying and defending life and liberty, of acquiring, possessing
 and protecting property, and of pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness.
 Sec. 2. All power is inherent in the people; all free governments are
 instituted by their authority and for their benefit and they have a right
 to alter and reform the same when their safety and happiness require it.
 Sec. 3. All men have a natural and inalienable right to worship God
 1 Published by Liberian Information Service, Monrovia. Supplied by the U.S.
 Embassy, Monrovia.
 
 422
 
 
 according to the dictates of their own conscience, without obstruction or
 molestation from others: all persons demeaning themselves peaceably, and
 not obstructing others in their religious worship, are entitled to the protection of law in the free exercise of their own religion, and no sect of
 Christians shall have exclusive privileges or preference over any other
 sect; but all shall be alike tolerated; and no religious test whatever shall be
 required as a qualification for civil office, or the exercise of any civil right.
 Sec. 4. There shall be no slavery within this Republic. Nor shall any
 citizen of this Republic, or any person resident therein, deal in slaves,
 either within or without this Republic, directly or indirectly.
 Sec. 5. The people have a right at all times, in an orderly and peaceable
 manner, to assemble and consult upon the common good, to instruct their
 representatives, and to petition the government, or any public functionaries
 for the redress of grievances.
 Sec. 6. Every person injured shall have remedy therefor, by due
 courses of law; justice shall be done without sale, denial or delay; and in all
 cases, not arising under martial law or upon impeachment, the parties
 shall have state right to a trial by jury, and to be heard in person or by
 counsel, or both.
 Sec. 7. No person shall be held to answer for a capital or infamous crime,
 except in cases of impeachment, cases arising in the army or navy, and
 petty offences, unless upon presentment by a grand jury; and every
 person criminally charged shall have a right to be seasonably furnished
 with a copy of the charge, to be confronted with the witness against him,
 to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to
 have a speedy, public, and impartial trial by a jury of the vicinity. He
 shall not be compelled to furnish or give evidence against himself; and no
 person shall for the same offence, be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb.
 Sec. 8. No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, property or privilege, but by judgment of his peers or the law of the land.
 Sec. 9. No place shall be searched, nor person seized on a criminal
 charge, or suspicion, unless upon warrant lawfully issued, upon probable
 cause supported by oath, or solemn affirmation, specially designating the
 place or person, and the object of the search.
 Sec. 10. Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor excessive punishments inflicted. Nor shall the legislature
 make law impairing the obligation of contracts; nor any law rendering
 any act punishable in any manner in which it was not punishable when it
 was committed.
 Sec. 11. All elections shall be by ballot; and every citizen (male and
 female) of twenty one years of age, possessing real estate, shall have the
 right of suffrage. When applied to Voters in the Provinces of the hinterland
 of the Republic, "possessing real estate" shall be construed to include
 possessing a hut on which he or she pays the hut tax.
 
 423
 
 Liberia
 
 
 Sec. 12. The people have a, right to keep and to bear arms for the
 common defence. And as in time of peace armies are dangerous to liberty,
 they ought not to be maintained without the consent of the Legislature;
 and the military power shall always be held in exact subordination to the
 civil authority and be governed by it.
 Sec. 13. Private property shall not be taken for public use without
 just compensation.
 Sec. 14. The powers of this government shall be divided into three
 distinct departments: Legislative, Executive, and Judicial; and no person
 belonging to one of these departments, shall exercise any of the powers
 belonging to either of the others. This section is not to be construed to
 include Justices of the Peace.
 Sec. 15. The liberty of the press is essential to the security of freedom
 in a state; it ought not, therefore, to be restrained in this Republic.
 The printing press shall be free to every person, who undertakes to
 examine the proceedings of the legislature or any branch of government;
 and no law shall ever be made to restrain the rights thereof. The free
 communication of thoughts and opinions, is one of the invaluable rights
 of man, and every citizen may freely speak, write and print, on any subject,
 being responsible for the abuse of that liberty.
 In prosecutions for the publication of papers, investigating the official
 conduct of officers, or men in a public capacity, or where the matter
 published is proper for public information the truth thereof may be given
 in evidence. And in all indictment for libels, the jury shall have right
 to determine the law and the facts, under the direction of the court, as
 in other cases.
 Sec. 16. No subsidy, charge, impost, or duties ought to be established,
 fixed, laid or levied, under any pretext whatsoever, without the consent
 of the people, or their representatives in the legislature.
 Sec. 17. Suits may be brought against the Republic in such manner,
 and in such cases as the legislature may be law direct.
 Sec. 18. No person can, in any cases, be subject to the law martial, or
 to any penalties or pains, by virtue of that law (except those employed in
 the army or navy, and except the militia in actual service) but the by
 authority of the Legislature.
 Sec. 19. In order to prevent those who are vested with authority
 from becoming oppressors, the people shall have a right at such periods,
 and in such manner, as they shall establish by their form of government,
 to cause their public officers to return to private life, and to fill up vacant
 places, by certain and regular elections and appointments.
 Sec. 20. That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties:
 unless for capital offences, when the proof is evident, or presumption
 great: and the privilege and benefit of the writ of habeas corpus shall be
 enjoyed in this Republic, in the most free, easy, cheap, expeditious and
 
 424
 
 Liberia
 
 
 ample manner, and shall not be suspended by the legislature, except upon
 the most urgent and pressing occasions, and for a limited time, not ex-
 ceeding twelve months.
 ARTICLE 2
 LEGISLATIVE POWERS
 Sec. 1. The Legislative power shall be vested in a Legislature of Liberia,
 and shall consist of two separate branches. A House of Representatives
 and a Senate, to be styled the Legislature of Liberia; each of which shall
 have a negative on the other, and the enacting style of their acts and laws
 shall be, "It is enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
 Republic of Liberia in Legislature Assembled."
 Sec. 2. The representatives shall be elected by, and for the inhabitants
 of the several counties and provinces of Liberia and shall be apportioned
 among the several counties and provinces as follows: The County of
 Montserrado shall have five representatives, the Territory of Marshall
 shall have one representative, the County of Grand Bassa shall have four
 representatives, the County of Sinoe shall have four representatives, the
 County of Maryland shall have four representatives, the County of Grand
 Cape Mount shall have three representatives, and the three existing
 Provinces of the Republic situated in the hinterland thereof shall each
 have one representative, and all counties which shall hereafter be admitted
 into the Republic shall have one representative, and for every ten thousand
 inhabitants one representative shall be added. No person shall be a
 representative who has not resided in the County or Province two whole
 years immediately previous to his or her election, and who shall not when
 elected be an inhabitant of the County or Province, and who does not own
 unencumbered real estate of not less value than one thousand dollars in
 the County in which he or she resides or who in the Provinces shall not
 own a hut in which he or she resides and for which he or she pays the hut
 tax, and who shall not have attained the age of twenty-three years.
 The representatives shall be elected quadrennially and shall serve for
 four years from the time of their election.
 Sec. 3. When a vacancy occurs in the representation of any County or
 Province by death, resignation or otherwise, it shall be filled by a new
 election.
 Sec. 4. The House of Representatives shall elect their own Speaker and
 other officers; they shall also have the sole power of impeachment.
 Sec. 5. The Senate shall consist of two members from Montserrado
 County, two from Bassa County, two from Sinoe County, and two from
 each county which may be hereafter incorporated into this Republic.
 No person shall be a Senator, who shall not have resided three whole years
 
 Liberia
 
 425
 
 
 immediately previous to his election in the Republic of Liberia, and who
 shall not when elected be an inhabitant of the county which he or she
 represents, and who does not own unencumbered real estate of not less
 value than one thousand two hundred dollars in the county and who shall
 not have attained the age of twenty five years. The Senator shall serve
 for six years and shall be elected quadrennially, and those elected in A.D.
 1905 shall retain their seats for six years from the time of their election,
 and all who are otherwise elected shall serve for six years.
 Sec. 6. The Senate shall try all impeachments: the Senators being first
 sworn or solemnly affirmed to try the same impartially, and according to
 law; and no person shall be convicted but by the concurrence of two
 thirds of the Senators present. Judgment in such cases shall not extend
 beyond removal from office, and disqualification to hold an office in the
 Republic; but the party may be tried at law for the same offence.
 Sec. 7. It shall be the duty of the Legislature, as soon as conveniently
 may be, after the adoption of this Constitution, and once at least in every
 ten years afterwards, to cause a true census to be taken of each town, and
 county of the Republic of Liberia, and a representative shall be allowed
 every town having a population of ten thousand inhabitants and for
 every additional ten thousand in the counties after the first census, one
 representative shall be added to that county, until the number of repre-
 sentatives shall amount to thirty; and afterwards one representative shall
 be added for every thirty thousand.
 Sec. 8. Each branch of Legislature shall be Judge of the election returns
 and qualifications of its own members. A majority of each shall be
 necessary to transact business, but a less number may adjourn from day
 to day and compel the attendance of absent members. Each house may
 adopt its own rules of proceedings, enforce order, and with the concurrence
 of two thirds may expel a member.
 Sec. 9. Neither house shall adjourn for more than two days without
 the consent of the other: and both houses shall always sit in the same
 town.
 Sec. 10. Every bill or resolution which shall have passed both branches
 of the Legislature, shall, before it becomes a law, be laid before the
 President for his approval; if he approves, he shall sign it; if not, he shall
 return it to the Legislature with his objections. If the Legislature shall
 afterward pass the bill or resolution by a vote of two thirds in each branch,
 it shall become a law. If the President shall neglect to return such bill or
 resolution to the Legislature, with his objections, for five days after the
 same shall have been so laid before him the Legislature remaining in
 session during that time, such neglect shall be equivalent to his signature.
 Sec. 11. The Senators and Representatives shall receive from the
 Republic a compensation for their services to be ascertained by law; and
 shall be privileged from arrest except for treason, felony or breach of
 
 426
 
 Liberia
 
 
 the peace while attending at, going to, or returning from the session of the
 Legislature.
 ARTICLE 3.
 EXECUTIVE POWER
 Sec. 1. The Supreme Executive Power shall be vested in a President
 who shall be elected by the people, and shall hold his office for a term of
 eight years. No President may be elected for two consecutive terms,
 of eight years, but should a majority of the ballots cast at a second or
 any other succeeding election by all of the electors voting thereat elect
 him, his second or any other succeeding term of office shall be for four
 years. He shall be Commander-in-Chief of the Army, Navy and Air
 Forces. He shall in the recess of the Legislature, have power to call out the
 Militia or any portion thereof, into actual service in defence of the Republic.
 He shall have power to make treaties, provided the Senate concur therein,
 by a vote of two thirds of the Senators present. He shall nominate, and
 with the advice and consent of the Senate, appoint and commission all
 Ambassadors and other public Ministers and Consuls, Secretary of State,
 of National Defence, of the Treasury, Attorney General, all Judges of
 Courts, Sheriffs, Coroners, Marshals, Justices of the Peace, Clerks of Courts,
 Registers, Notaries Public, and all other officers of State civil and military,
 whose appointment may not be otherwise provided for by the Consti-
 tution, or by standing laws. And in the recess of the Senate, he may
 fill any vacancies in those offices, until the next session of the Senate. He
 shall receive all Ambassadors and other public Ministers. He shall take
 care that the laws be faithfully executed. He shall inform the Legislature
 from time to time of the condition of the Republic, and recommend any
 public measures for their adoption which he may think expedient. He
 may, after conviction, remit any public forfeitures and penalties, and
 grant reprieves and pardons for public offences except in the case of impeachment. He may require information and advice from any public
 officer, touching matters pertaining to his office. He may on extraordinary
 occasions, convene the Legislature, and may adjourn the two houses
 whenever they cannot agree as to the time of adjournment.
 Sec. 2. There shall be a Vice-President who shall be elected in the same
 manner, and for the same term as that of the President, and whose qualifi-
 cations shall be the same. He shall be President of the Senate, and give
 the casting vote when the house is equally divided on any subject. And
 in case of the removal of President from office, his death, resignation, or
 inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same
 shall devolve on the Vice-President; and the Legislature may be law pro-
 vide for the cases of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of the
 
 Liberia
 
 427
 
 
 President, and Vice-President, declaring what officer shall than act as
 President, and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be
 removed, or a President shall be elected. When a vacancy occurs in the
 office of Vice-President by reason of death, resignation or otherwise after
 any regular election of President and Vice-President, the President shall
 immediately call a special election to fill said vacancy.
 Sec. 3. The Secretary of State shall keep the records of the State and
 all the records and papers of the Legislative body, and all other public
 records and documents, not belonging to any other department, and shall
 lay the same, when required, before the President or Legislature. He
 shall attend upon them when required and perform such other duties as
 may be enjoined by law.
 Sec. 4. The Secretary of the Treasury, or other person who may by
 law be charged with custody of the public monies shall, before he receives
 such monies, give bounds to the State with sufficient sureties, to the acceptance of the Legislature, for the faithful discharge of his trust. He
 shall exhibit a true account of such monies when required by the President
 or Legislature, and no monies shall be drawn from the Treasury, but by
 warrant from the President, in consequence of appropriation made by law.
 Sec. 5. All Ambassadors and other public Ministers and Consuls, the
 Secretary of State, of National Defence and of the Treasury, the Attorney
 General, and Post Master General shall hold their office during the pleasure
 of the President. Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Coroners, Marshals,
 Clerks of Court, Registers, and Notaries Public, shall hold their offices for
 the term of two years from the date of their respective commissions;
 but may be removed from office within that time by the President
 at his pleasure; and all other officers whose term of office may not be
 otherwise limited by law, shall hold their offices during the pleasure of the
 President. The Legislature shall pass a standing law organizing and
 regulating the Civil Service of the Republic, which law shall declare what
 offices may be controlled by the provisions of said law. The provisions of
 this section of the Constitution relating to tenure of office shall not apply
 to offices falling within the provisions of the Civil Service law.
 Sec. 6. Every civil officer may be removed from office by impeachment
 for official misconduct. Every such officer may also be removed by the
 President upon the address of both branches of the Legislature, stating
 their particular reason for his removal.
 Sec. 7. No person shall be eligible to the office of President who has
 not been a citizen of this Republic by birth or a nationalized citizen of over
 twenty five years residence, and who is not possessed of unencumbered
 real estate of the value of two thousand and five hundred dollars.
 Sec. 8. The President shall at stated times receive for his service
 compensation which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the
 period for which he shall have been elected. And before he enters on the
 
 428
 
 Liberia
 
 
 execution of his office, he shall take the following oath or affirmation:
 I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the
 office of President of the Republic of Liberia, and will, to the best
 of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and
 enforce the laws of the Republic of Liberia.
 ARTICLE 4
 JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
 Sec. 1. The Judicial power of this Republic shall be vested in one
 Supreme Court, and such subordinate Courts as the Legislature may
 from time to time establish. The Judges of the Supreme Court, and all
 other Judges of Courts shall hold their office during good behavior;
 but may be removed by the President, on the address of two thirds of
 both houses for that purpose, or by impeachment and conviction thereon.
 The Judges shall have salaries established by law which may be increased,
 but not diminished during their continuance in office. They shall not
 receive other perquisites or emoluments whatever from parties or others,
 on account of any duty required of them.
 Sec. 2. The Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction in all cases
 affecting Ambassadors, or other public Ministers and Consuls, and those to
 which a County shall be a party. In all other cases the Supreme Court
 shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exception and under such regulations as the Legislature shall from time to time
 make.
 Sec. 3. The number of Justices of the Supreme Court of the Republic of
 Liberia shall be limited to one Chief Justice and four Associate Justices,
 a majority of whom shall be deemed competent to transact the business
 of the Supreme Court and from whose judgment there shall be no appeal.
 ARTICLE 5
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 Sec. 1. All laws now in force in the Commonwealth of Liberia and not
 repugnant to this Constitution, shall be in force as the laws of the Republic
 of Liberia, until they shall be repealed by the Legislature.
 Sec. 2. All judges, magistrates, and other officers now concerned in the
 administration of justice in the Commonwealth of Liberia, and all other
 existing civil and military officers therein, shall continue to hold and discharge the duties of their respective offices, in the name and by the authority of the Republic, until others shall be appointed and commissioned
 in their stead, pursuant to this Constitution.
 
 Liberia
 
 429
 
 
 Sec. 3. All towns and municipal corporations within the Republic,
 constituted under the laws of the Commonwealth of Liberia shall retain
 their existing organizations and privileges, and the respective officers
 thereof shall remain in office, and act under the authority of this Republic,
 in the same manner and with the like powers as they now possess under
 the laws of said Commonwealth.
 Sec. 4. The first election of President, Vice-President, Senators and
 Representatives, shall be held on the first Tuesday in October in the Year
 of our Lord Eighteen Hundred and Forty Seven in the same manner as
 elections of members of the Council are now held in the Commonwealth
 of Liberia, and the votes shall be certified and returned to the Colonial
 Secretary, and the results of the election shall be ascertained, posed and
 notified by him, as is now by law provided, in case of such members of the
 Council.
 Sec. 5. All other elections of President, Vice-President, Senators and
 Representatives, shall be held in representative towns on the first Tuesday
 in May in every two years, such elections to be held and regulated in such
 manner as the Legislature may by law prescribe. The returns of votes shall
 be made to the Secretary of State, who shall open the same and forthwith
 issue notices of the election to the persons apparently so elected Senators
 and Representatives; and all such returns shall be by him laid before the
 Legislature at its next ensuing session, together with a list of the names
 of the persons who appear by such returns to have been duly elected
 Senators and Representatives; and the persons appearing by said returns
 to be elected, shall proceed to organize themselves accordingly as the
 Senate and House of Representatives. The votes for President shall be
 sorted, counted and declared by the House of Representatives. And if no
 person shall appear to have a majority of such votes the Senators and
 Representatives present shall in Convention, by joint ballot, elect from
 among the persons having the three highest number of votes, a person
 to act as President for the ensuing term.
 Sec. 6. The Legislature shall assemble once at least in every year, and
 such meeting shall be on the first Monday in January unless a different
 day shall be appointed by law.
 Sec. 7. Every Legislator and other officer appointed under this con-
 stitution shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and
 subscribe a solemn oath or affirmation to support the Constitution of this
 Republic, and faithfully and impartially to discharge the duties of such
 office. The presiding officer of the Senate shall administer such oath or
 affirmation to the President, in convention of both houses; and the President shall administer the same to the Vice-President, to Senators and to
 the Representatives in like manner. When the President is unable to
 attend, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court may administer the oath or
 affirmation to him at any place, and also to the Vice-President, Senators
 
 430
 
 iberia
 
 
 and Representatives, in convention. Other officers may take such oath
 or affirmation before the President, Chief Justice, or any other person
 who may be designated by law.
 Sec. 8. All elections of public officers shall be made by a majority of
 the votes except in cases otherwise regulated by the Constitution or by
 law.
 Sec. 9. Offices created by the Constitution which the present circumstances of the Republic do not require to be filled, shall not be filled until
 the Legislature shall deem it necessary.
 Sec. 10. The property of which a woman may be possessed at the time of
 her marriage, and also that of which she may afterwards become possessed,
 otherwise than by her husband, shall not be held responsible for his debts,
 whether contracted before or after marriage. Nor shall the property thus
 intended to be secured to the woman be alienated otherwise than by her
 free and voluntary consent, and such alienation may be made by her
 either by sale, devise or otherwise.
 Sec. 11. In all cases in which estates are insolvent, the widow shall be
 entitled to one third of the personal estate, during her natural life, and to
 one third of the personal estate which she shall hold in her own right
 subject to alienation by her, by devise or otherwise.
 Sec. 12. No person shall be entitled to hold real estate in this Republic,
 unless he be a citizen of the same. Nevertheless this article shall not be
 construed to apply to Colonization, Missionary, Educational, or other
 benevolent institutions, so long as the property or estate is applied to its
 legitimate purpose.
 Sec. 13. The great object of forming these Colonies being to provide a
 home for the dispersed and oppressed children of Africa, and to regenerate
 and enlighten this benighted continent, none but Negroes or persons of
 Negro descent, shall be eligible to citizenship in this Republic.
 Sec. 14. The purchase of any land by any citizen or citizens from the
 aborigines of this country for his or their own use, or for the benefit of
 others as estate or estates in fee simple shall be considered null and void
 to all intent and purpose.
 Sec. 15. The improvement of the native tribes and their advancement
 in the arts of agriculture and husbandry, being a cherished object of this
 government, it shall be the duty of the President to appoint in each
 county some discreet person whose duty it shall be to make regular and
 periodical tours through the country for the purpose of calling the attention of the natives to those wholesome branches of industry, and of instructing them in the same and the Legislature shall, as soon as conveniently be done, make provisions for these purposes by the appropriation of
 money.
 Sec. 16. The existing regulations of the American Colonization Society
 in the Commonwealth relative to emigrants, shall remain the same
 in the Republic, until regulated by compact between the Society and the
 Republic; nevertheless, the Legislature shall make no law prohibiting
 immigration. And it shall be among the first duties of the Legislature to
 take measures to arrange the future relation between the American
 Colonization Society and this Republic.
 Sec. 17. This constitution may be altered whenever two thirds of both
 branches of the Legislature shall deem it necessary; in which cases alterations or amendments shall first be considered and approved by the Legislature by the concurrence of two thirds of the Members of each branch and
 afterwards by them submitted to the people and adopted by two thirds of
 all electors at a special election called for that purpose.
 
 
</pre>
