<pre>
 Mali
 
 CONSTITUTION
 of the
 REPUBLIC OF MALI1
 September 22, 1960 as amended January 29, 1961
 The people of Mali hereby solemnly proclaims the Republic of Mali
 founded on the ideal of liberty and justice.
 The Republic of Mali shall organize the conditions necessary to the
 harmonious evolution of the individual and of the family within a modern
 society and with respect for the African personality.
 The people of Mali solemnly reaffirms the rights and liberties of man
 and the citizen consecrated by the Universal Declaration of the Rights
 of Man of December 10, 1948.
 It recognizes the right of all men to work and rest, the right to strike,
 the freedom to join organizations of co-operation or trade unions of their
 choice for the defense of their professional interests. Work is the duty of all
 citizens but no one may be forced to a particular work except in order to
 carry out an exceptional service of general interest equal for all, under
 conditions stipulated by law.
 The people of Mali conscious of the historical, moral and material
 imperatives which unite the States of Africa, desirous of accomplishing
 the political, economic and social unity which are necessary to the affirmation of the African personality, affirms its determination to pursue
 its task with a view to the realization of African unity.
 TITLE I
 SOVEREIGNTY
 Art. 1. The Republic of Mali is indivisible, democratic, secular and
 social. It shall ensure to all equality before the law, without distinction
 of origin, race, sex or religion.
 The official language shall be French.
 The motto is "One people, one purpose, one faith."
 1 Law no 60-1 A.N.R.M. of September 22, 1960, amended by Laws no. 61-25 and
 61-26 of January 20, 1961, supplied by U.S. Embassy, Bamako. Translated by Editor.
 
 535
 
 
 The flag is composed of three equal vertical stripes of green, gold and red.
 A law shall determine the national anthem and the coat of arms of the
 Republic.
 Its principle is government of the people, by the people and for the
 people.
 Art. 2. Sovereignty belongs to the whole -people. No section of the
 people nor any individual may attribute to himself the exercise thereof.
 The people shall exercise its sovereignty through its representatives and,
 in certain cases, by means of referendum. Suffrage shall be universal,
 equal and secret. It may be direct or indirect under the conditions stipulated by law.
 All Malian.nationals of both sexes who have reached their -majority
 and who enjoy civil and political rights may vote under the conditions to
 be determined by law.
 Art. 3. Political parties and groups shall be instrumental in the expression of the suffrage. They shall be formed freely and shall carry on
 their activities freely while respecting democratic principles, the interests,
 the laws and the regulations, of the State.
 Art. 4. Any act of racial or ethnic discrimination, as well as any regional
 propaganda which might threaten the security of the State or the integrity
 in the territory of the Republic, shall be punished by law.
 Art. 5. The institutions of the.Republic are:
 (1) the Government;
 (2) the Parliament;
 (3) the Supreme Court (Coup d'Etat);
 (4) the High Court of Justice.
 The seat of the institutions is at Bamako. It may be transferred .to
 another place by law.
 TITLE II
 THE: GOVERNMENT.
 Art. 6. The Government of the Republic of Mali shall be composed of
 the President of the Government and the Ministers. He shall be responsible before the National Assembly.-'
 Art. 7. At the beginning of each legislature or, in the case of vacancies
 in the Government, in accordance with -the provisions of Article 34; 35
 and 36 below, the President of the National Assembly shall, after consultation, appoint a candidate to the post of President of the Government.
 The person so designated shall expound his program to the National
 Assembly which shall invest him by an absolute majority of its members.
 The President of the Government shall be elected for a term not to exceed
 that of the legislature. He may be reelected.
 
 Mali
 
 536
 
 
 Art. 8. After his investiture, the President of the Government shall
 appoint the members of the Government by decree, and shall apportion
 their powers. In case of vacancy or impediment, the duties of the President
 of the Government shall be provisionally exercised by the President
 ad interim.
 The functions of the President of the Government and of the ministers
 shall be incompatible with any public office or with the exercise with
 any professional activity under the conditions stipulated by law.
 Art. 9. The President of the Government, Head of the State, shall be
 the guardian of the Constitution and shall ensure the regular functioning
 of the institutions.
 He shall be the guarantor of national independence, of the integrity
 of the territory of the Republic, and of respect for international treaties,
 conventions and agreements.
 He shall preside over the Council of Ministers. He shall cause to be
 drawn up and preserved the report of the meetings.
 He shall appoint in the Council of Ministers the members of the Supreme
 Court (Coup d'Etat), ambassadors, envoys extraordinary and high civil
 and military officials the list of which shall be drawn up by law.
 He shall sign and ratify treaties.
 He shall accredit Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary to foreign
 powers. Ambassadors and Envoys Extraordinary shall be accredited to
 him.
 He shall be the head of the Armed Forces.
 He shall have, within the Council of Ministers, the right of pardon.
 Art. 10. The President of the Republic shall promulgate laws within
 fifteen days of their transmission to the Government. He may before the
 expiration of this time limit ask the Assembly for a second reading of a
 law or of certain of its articles. This second reading may not be refused. If
 the Assembly maintains its vote, the Government may pose the question
 of confidence in the general policy. If a vote of confidence is granted, the
 Government bill together with the amendments agreed thereto shall
 enter into force as a law.
 In case of emergency declared or agreed by the National Assembly,
 the promulgation and publication of laws must .take place within three
 days.
 Art. 11. The Government shall conduct the policy of the Republic.
 It shall control the armed forces. It shall be responsible for the national
 defense.
 The President of the' Government shall be responsible before the
 National Assembly under the conditions stipulated in this Constitution.
 The Ministers shall be responsible to him. He shall dismiss them.
 The President of the Government shall direct the action of the Govern-
 ment. He shall have the initiative in laws together with the members
 
 Mali
 
 537
 
 
 of the National Assembly. He shall exercise the regulatory power. He shall
 ensure the execution of laws, regulations and judicial decisions.
 The President of the Government shall be the supreme head of the
 administration. He shall make all civil and military appointments other
 than those made in the Council of Ministers. He may delegate his powers
 of appointment to a member of the Government.
 The Council of Ministers must be informed of decisions affecting the
 general policy of the State, of bills, ordinances and regulatory decrees.
 Art. 12. The acts of the President of the Government shall be signed,
 as necessary, by the Minister responsible for their execution.
 Art. 13. The President of the Government may delegate certain of his
 powers to a Minister.
 Art. 14. The President of the Government shall sign the decrees of
 closure of ordinary and extraordinary sessions of the National Assembly.
 Art. 15. The President of the Government may, after deliberation
 in the Council of Ministers, pledge the responsibility of the Government
 before the National Assembly.
 TITLE III
 PARLIAMENT
 Art. 16. Parliament shall be constituted by one single assembly entitled
 the National Assembly. Deputies to the National Assembly shall be elected
 by universal direct suffrage for five years.
 In case of serious disturbances or external threats which might com-
 promise the normal procedure of elections, the Government may, with
 the agreement of the President of the Assembly, suspend the elections
 and prolong the term of a legislature.
 Art. 17. A law shall determine the number of deputies, their emolu-
 ments, the conditions of eligibility and ineligibility and the offices in-
 compatible with membership in the Assembly.
 It shall likewise determine the conditions under which persons shall
 be elected to replace deputies whose seats have fallen vacant pending the
 general renewal of the Assembly.
 Art. 18. All binding instructions upon deputies shall be null and void.
 The right to vote of deputies shall be personal. However, delegation
 of the vote may be authorized when a deputy is absent because of sickness,
 in order to fulfil a mission or mandate conferred upon him by the Govern-
 ment or the Assembly, or in order to fulfil his military service. No member
 may be delegated more than one vote.
 No deputy may be prosecuted, sought, arrested, detained or tried as a
 result of the opinions or votes expressed by him in the exercise of his
 functions.
 
 538
 
 Mali
 
 
 No deputy may, during sessions, be prosecuted or arrested for criminal
 or minor offenses without the authorization of the National Assembly,
 except in flagrante delicto.
 When Parliament is not in session, no deputy may be arrested without
 the authorization of the secretariat of the National Assembly, except in
 flagrante delicto or in case of final conviction.
 The detention or prosecution of a deputy shall be suspended if the
 National Assembly so requests.
 Art. 19. The National Assembly shall pass the laws.
 It shall convene automatically in two ordinary sessions a year, upon
 convocation by its President. The budget, however, must be voted before
 the opening of the budgetary period. The duration of each ordinary
 session shall not exceed two months.
 Art. 20. The National Assembly shall be convened in extraordinary
 session by its President to consider a specific agenda at the request of the
 President of the Government or of an absolute majority of deputies.
 Only the President of the Government may ask for the Assembly to
 be convened during the month following the closure of an extraordinary
 session. The duration of extraordinary sessions may not exceed 15 days.
 Art. 21. The National Assembly shall draw up its rules of procedure.
 It shall elect its secretariat and appoint its commissions each year at the
 opening of the first ordinary session.
 Art. 22. Meetings of the Assembly shall be public unless it decides
 otherwise. The report of the debates shall be published in the Journal
 Officiel des Dgbats.
 The Assembly may sit in secret committee at the request of the President
 of the Government.
 Art. 23. The President of the Government and the Ministers shall be
 heard at any time by the Assembly and the commissions. They may call
 for the assistance of Government commissioners.
 TITLE IV
 RELATIONS BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT
 AND PARLIAMENT
 Art. 24. Within the framework of the provisions of this Constitution
 laws shall establish the regulations concerning:
 - the obligations imposed by national defense for the security of
 the country upon the persons and property of citizens and foreigners;
 - nationality, civil rights, status and legal capacity of persons, marriage
 contracts, inheritance and gifts, property rights, civil and commercial
 obligations, the system of associations, expropriation;
 - determination of crimes and misdemeanors as well as the penalties
 
 Mali
 
 539
 
 
 imposed therefor, criminal procedure, the judiciary police, extradition,
 amnesty, the creation of new juridical systems, the status of law officers
 and bar associations;
 - the general status and.individual regulations for the public service;
 - the issuance of currency, the basis, the rate and methods of collecting
 taxes.
 Laws shall determine the fundamental principles of;
 - the general organization of national defense;
 - the right to work,! social security, legislation pertaining to unions,
 the organization and powers of professional associations;
 - education and scientific research;
 - the public accounts;
 - the establishment of public services and institutions;
 - the electoral system  of the National Assembly and the local as-
 semblies;
 - the general organization of administration and security;
 - the free administration of local communities, the extent of their
 jurisdiction and their resources;
 the transfer and administration of State properties;
 - benefit societies. and savings;
 - the organization of production;
 - the organization of justice;
 - the prison system.
 Financial laws shall determine the financial resources and obligations
 of the State.
 Laws pertaining to national planning shall determine the objectives of
 the economic and social action of the State.
 * Art. 25. The National Assembly shall authorize the declaration of war.
 Art. 26. Martial law and siege law shall -be decreed in meetings of the
 Council of Ministers. Their prorogation beyond 15 days may be authorized
 only by the National Assembly.
 Art. 27. Matters other than those that, fall within the domain of law
 shall be of a regulatory character.
 Legislative texts concerning these matters in force before the establish-
 ment of this Constitution may be modified be decree taken with the advice
 of the Supreme Court (Coup d'Etat).
 Art. 28. The National Assembly may by law authorize the President
 of the Government, in order to carry out its program and for a limited
 period, to take by ordinance measures that are normally within the
 domain of law. These ordinances shall be enacted in meetings of the
 Council of Ministers after consultation with the Supreme Court. They shall
 come into force upon their publication, but shall become null and void
 if the bill for their ratification is not submitted to Parliament before
 the date set by the enabling act.
 
 540
 
 Mali
 
 
 : At the expiration of the time limit referred to in the preceding paragraph
 of this article, the ordinances may be modified only by law in those matters
 which are within the legislative domain.
 Art. 29. Proposals and amendments which do not fall within the domain
 of law shall be inadmissible. Inadmissibility shall be rules upon by the
 President of the National Assembly or at the request of the President of
 the Government. In case of doubt the President of the Assembly shall
 consult the Supreme Court (Coup d'Etat).
 Art. 30. Deputies may file bills and amendments. However, no bill
 or amendment shall be admissible when its adoption would result in the
 increase of a public expenditure unless it is accompanied by a proposal
 for revenues or economies to an equivalent amount.
 Art. 31. The Government also, shall have the right of amendment.
 The Government may, after debate has opened, refuse examination of
 any amendment which has not previously been submitted to it.
 Art. 32. Either the Government or the deputies may decide that a law
 should be voted urgently. A request by the Government to this effect shall
 always be acceeded to. A request by Deputies shall be decided by the
 Assembly. Whenever an urgent vote is granted, examination of the bill
 in question shall have priority on the agenda.
 Art. 33. The National Assembly shall consider the finance bill immedia-
 tely upon the opening of the ordinary session which procedes the budgetary
 period. The finance bill must provide the receipts necessary wholly to
 cover expenses.
 Should the Assembly fail to reach a decision before the beginning of the
 budgetary period or should it fail to vote the budget in balance, the Go-
 vernment shall return the finance bill within fifteen days to the Assembly,
 convened in special session for the purpose.
 The National Assembly must then reach a decision within eight days.
 If its deliberation has not resulted in voting the budget in balance, the
 provisions of the bill may be enforced by the Government on the basis
 of the receipts of the preceding fiscal year upon the advice of the Supreme
 Court (Coup d'Etat).
 Art. 34. The President of the Government, after deliberation by the
 Council of Ministers, may pledge the responsibility of the Government
 with regard to a declaration of general policy.
 Whenever the question of confidence is raised, one or more motions
 of censure may be filed with the Assembly within a time limit of twenty
 four hours. Any motion of censure must contain the principles of a Govern-
 mental program and must indicate the name of the person whom it is
 proposed to invest with Governmental authority.
 If, at the end of the time limit provided, no motion of censure has been
 presented, the President shall attest that the Government has not lost
 the confidence of Parliament. The same shall take place when none of the
 motions of censure filed have been accepted.
 
 Mali
 
 541
 
 
 Art. 35. The vote on a motion of censure may only take place forty
 eight hours after it has been filed. A motion of censure may be adopted
 only by an absolute majority of the members of the Assembly. Only the
 votes in favor of the resignation of the Government and of the investitute
 of a proposed new President shall be counted.
 Art. 36. The Assembly may question the responsibility of the Govern-
 ment in matters of general policy by filing a motion of censure signed by
 at least one quarter of its members. In this case the procedure shall be
 the same as that set forth in Articles 34 and 35.
 Art. 37. If two Ministerial crises occur within twenty four consecutive
 months, the National Assembly shall be automatically dissolved. The
 secretariat of the Assembly shall continue, and the Government shall
 ensure the dispatch of current business until the election of a new As-
 sembly. General elections shall take place at the latest on the fifth Sunday
 after dissolution of the National Assembly.
 TITLE V
 TREATIES AND INTERNATIONAL
 AGREEMENTS
 Art. 38. The Republic shall conform to the rules of international law.
 Peace treaties, commercial treaties, treaties or agreements relative to
 international organization, those that imply a commitment for the finances
 of the State, those that modify provisions of a legislative nature, those
 relative to the status of persons, those that call for the cession, exchange
 or addition of territory may be ratified or approved only by a law.
 Agreements in a simplified form relating to any one of the matters
 enumerated in this article may be approved only by a law.
 Treaties or agreements shall go into effect only after having been
 ratified or approved.
 No cession, no exchange, no addition of territory shall be valid without
 the consent of the populations concerned.
 Art. 39. If the Supreme Court (Coup d'Etat) shall declare that an inter-
 national commitment contains a clause contrary to the Constitution
 of the Republic, authorization to ratify or approve this commitment
 may be given only after amendment of the Constitution.
 Art. 40. The Government of the Republic shall be responsible for the
 implementation or treaties and international agreements.
 
 Mali
 
 542
 
 
 Mali
 
 TITLE VI
 TERRITORIAL UNITS
 Art. 41. The territorial units of the Republic are:
 - the regions,
 - the circles,
 - the districts,
 - the nomad tribes,
 - the communes,
 - the villages,
 the nomad groups.
 Other territorial units may be created by law. These units shall be free
 to govern themselves through elected councils and under the conditions
 stipulated by law. In all the territorial units the delegate of the Govern-
 ment shall be responsible for the interests of the Republic, for adminis-
 trative supervision and for seeing that the laws are respected.
 LTITLE VII
 JUDICIAL POWER
 Art. 42. The Republic of Mali shall ensure and guarantee the inde-
 pendence of the judicial power, guardian of individual liberty and re-
 sponsible for the application in its own domain of the laws of the Republic.
 TITLE VIII
 THE SUPREME COURT
 Art. 43. There shall be instituted a Supreme Court (Coup d'Etat),
 comprising a constitutional section, a section for litigation and a section
 for accounts.
 Art. 44. The Constitutional Section shall supervise the regularity of
 referendum procedures and shall proclaim their results. It shall rule upon
 any election disputes.
 It may be consulted about bills and regulations proposed by the public
 administration for an opinion on their conformity with the Constitution.
 It shall, in particular, take note, at the request of the President of the
 Government or the President of the Assembly, of the constitutionality
 of the laws of the State and of international agreements. In both cases,
 the Section shall have a period of fifteen days within which to reach its
 
 543
 
 
 decision. In case of emergency this period may be reduced to eight days.
 In all cases where a matter has been referred to the Constitutional
 Section, the period for promulgation provided in Article 10 shall be
 suspended.
 The Constitutional Section shall also rule upon the constitutionality
 of the rules of procedure of the National Assembly.
 Art. 45. A law shall stipulate the organization and functions of the
 Supreme Court (Coup d'Etat) as well as the procedure to be followed
 before it.
 TITLE IX
 THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
 Art. 46. The High Court of Justice shall be composed of deputies elected
 by the National Assembly after each election. It shall elect its President
 from among its members.
 A law shall determine the number of its members, its rules and the'
 procedures to be followed before it.
 Art. 47. The High Court of Justice shall be competent to try the
 President of the Government, Chief of State, and the Ministers indicted
 before it by the National Assembly for actions deemed to be crimes or
 misdemeanors, performed in the exercise of their office, and also to try
 their accomplices in case of a conspiracy against the security of the. State.
 Indictment shall be voted in open balloting and by a majority of two
 thirds of the deputies comprising the Assembly.
 The High Court shall bound by the definition or crimes and misde-
 meanors as well as by the determination of penalties as they are established
 by the criminal laws in force when the acts are committed.
 TITLE X
 AFRICAN UNITY
 Art. 48. The Republic may conclude with any African State, agree-
 ments of association or community which include the partial or total
 abandonment of sovereignty with a view to accomplishing African unity.
 TITLE XI
 CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT
 Art. 49. The President of the Government and the deputies alike shall
 have the right to initiate amendment of the Constitution.
 
 544
 
 Mali
 
 
 A bill of amendment shall be adopted by the National Assembly by a
 two thirds majority of its members.
 No amendment procedure may be undertaken or pursued if it affects the
 integrity of the territory.
 The republican form of State may not be the subject of amendment.
 TITLE XII
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
 Art. 50. The rules for the application of this Constitution shall be the
 subject of laws voted by the National Assembly.
 Art. 51. Existing legislation shall remain valid insofar as it is not
 contrary to this Constitution and insofar as it has not been expressly
 abrogated.
 Art. 52. In the event that this Constitution receives less than two
 thirds of the votes of the Deputies, it shall be submitted to referendum
 within thirty days.
 If it is approved, the Constitution shall be promulgated within a period
 of ten days.
 
 Mali
 
 545
 
 
</pre>
